not guilty, the numbers may change slightly in subsequent years. It is not possible 
to estimate the exact percentages by which they may change. 
• When broken down by different population groups, the developments in recent 
years are similar to the overall trend. However, there are some exceptions. For 
instance, among youths with a Moroccan migration background, a significant 
decrease in juvenile suspects is observed. 
• From 2018 to 2022, there has been an increase in the number of female suspects 
among minors, reaching the level of 2016. Particularly girls were often suspected of 
property crimes such as shoplifting. It should however be noted that girls still 
constitute only a relatively small proportion of the juvenile suspect population. In 
2022, 26% of the minor suspect population were girls, while among young adult 
suspects, 15% were female. 
• Although early school leavers make up a small part of the juvenile and young adult 
population, they are overrepresented in the group of juvenile and young adult 
suspects. Among young adults suspects, the proportion of early school leavers 
decreased by 8% from 2018 to 2021. The trend in the number of early school 
leavers among minor suspects fluctuates. 
• The number of suspects from the lowest-income groups and institutional residents 
decreased significantly among minors and young adults. 
• When broken down by type of crime, the registered crime trends show fluctuations. 
Property crimes, especially shoplifting, are the most common offenses among 
juvenile suspects. In 2022, there was an increase in these offenses compared to 
the previous two years, reaching the level of 2018. The number of juvenile suspects 
involved in (fire)arm and drug offenses remained relatively stable from 2018 to 
2022. 
 
The numbers of juvenile suspects are partially based on preliminary data. Due to some 
of the offenses not yet being cleared, backlogs in case processing and the system, or 
due to youth ultimately not being identified as suspects or being found not guilty, the 
numbers may change slightly in subsequent years. It is not possible to estimate the 
exact percentages by which they may change.  
Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek- en Documentatiecentrum Cahier 2023-13  |  38
