Project: P60151/1
dient:
Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
ARCADIS(UK) has been commissioned to assess the (relative) safety level of routeing
measures developed in the Netherlands using
the FSA process, expert judgement and
qualitative methods, to recommend risk control options for this routeing proposal and to
provide support data for evidence based decision making on cost-benefit of the proposals.
The report has its basis in a previous study made by Arcadis, commissioned by the Ministry
of Transport and the Environment, entitled ‘Navigational Risk Review of Wind Park
th12
Development in Dutch
Waters (Ref:259-7051 HZOI) October 2010. Five Wind Park
schemes (Variants) were considered and analysed with the most favourable Variant being
identified. This favoured Variant was subjected to further consideration and a hybrid Variant
was produced namely IMO Variant 16.09.11.
The IMO Variant was subjected to a HAZID assessment at a workshop held in Rotterdam on
20th
September 2011.
The HAZID assessment used expert judgement and qualitative methods
to arrive at this comparison of risk levels. After several iterations of the routing design this
resulted in the final IMO Variant 12.12.11. This Variant was subjected to further Hazid
Analysis with notable improvement in comparison to the intermediate draft IMO variants.
Hazids were also applied to the Present situation and Variant 1-2010 of the initial study.
As part of the HAZID assessment, Arcadis
compared the ‘IMO Variant’ (with all Round 2
Wind Parks except Scheveningen WP and with the traffic routeing arnended) with two
baseline Variants:
1. The present situation with Wind Park ‘Q10’ under construction about twelve miles off
the coast south of IJmuiden with the existing traffic routeing (separation schemes and
precautionary areas)
remaining the same.
2. The ‘Variant 1’ (2010) situation with all of the ‘Round 2’ wind parks developed and
with the
present traffic separation schemes, associated precautionary areas and
inshore traffic zones remaining unchanged but connected by recommended routes.
Apart from leading the workshop, the project team has carried out interviews with all relevant
experts, industries and interested organisations, in the run up to the workshop as well as after
the workshop to clarify outstanding points and complement the workshop results. This
fact
finding missing yielded the following observations:
1. A significant
amount of near misses in the approaches to IJmuiden and near misses
with oil/gas platforms have been observed. These stress the importance of a review of
routeing measures and the limited anchoring space around IJmuiden. Greater control
and influence of VTS could be a mitigating factor.
2. The trend is up with dear optimism from Amsterdam Port which has maintained
its
position in the fourth place of European ports. Tanker traffic is clearly on the increase
and measures must be in place to address this trend.
3. Concern is registered at the apparent indifference to the safety zones around wind
park and oil/gas assets. 2010 over 2009 saw a 72% increase in violations of Safety
Zones.
Date:
Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00 Page: 6 of 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind
park FSA
