Project: P60151/1
Client: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Formal
Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
Arcadis compiled Hazard
(UK) and Risk tables showing the results of the HAZID assessment
in great detail,
including the following locations that required particular attention in the Q1O
and Variant 1 scenarios (both assuming the unchanged,
present route structure in place):
- Approaches to IJmuiden: various potentially hazardous
situations can be created by
the small clearances between traffic
streams, close quarter situations at large aspect
angles
leading to ambigLlous situations in terms of colregs and deep draft vessels that
restricted
are in their ability to move and therefore may not be comply with
able to
their duty to give way (see area figure i).
A in
- Entrance
to 0ff Texel TSS: potentially hazardous situations can arise when various
traffic streams merge at the narrow entrance to the 0ff Texel the buoyed
TSS (due to
Vinca Gorthon wreck), leading
to a close quarters situation at a large aspect angle and
uncertainty as
to whether it is a crossing or an overtaking encounter (see area B in
figure i).
- Horizon oil platform: potentially
hazardous situations cao arise when give way ships
respond to
a close quarters encounter in accordance to Colregs by altering course
towards the platform (see area C in figure 1).
- Maas centre precautionary
area: Ships from Maas North TSS must alter course to
starboard
to approach the pilot station whilst at the same time being stand on vessels
for outbound traffic in a close quarters crossing encounter. Traffic
from Maas North
TSS and Maas Northwest TSS have
to cross the deep water channel to approach the
pilot station
and inbound ships from Maas West TSS cross the area to approach
Scheveningen pilot station. This results in multiple crossing in the precautionary
area
(see area D in figure i).
-
Approaches to and from Hook of Holland: Multiple crossing at poor aspect angles
between traffic to and from Rook of Holland from
and to and Schouwenbank occur in
this area. Traffic to and from
Schouwenbank also crosses the deep water route in this
Vessels
area. in the deep water route are restricted in their ability to take avoiding
action (see area E in figure i).
- At Brown Ridge/ De Ruyter: Near Brown Ridge and De Ruyter close quarter
situations between ships moving at very different from all
speeds directions converge
at large aspect angles and can doubt
cause as to whether it is a crossing or an
overtaking situation
and which is the stand on vessel (see area F in lïgure i).
- Breeveertien and West Rijn parks:
wind if wind parks are developed, the poor
visibility at locations
both can obscure timely onboard visual, AlS and radar detection
of close quarter encounters between crossing vessels. (Radar detection also
may be
obscured by false echoes of a target due to radar signals reflecting
off one or more
wind turbines).
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00
Page: 7of 192
Doc: P60151/1 —Netherlands Wind park FSA
