Project: P6015111
Client: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Formal
Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
Northwest traffic separation scheme in the
new Rijnveld precautionary area. The area’s
shape and the orientation
of its boundaries have been designed so that the different of
risk of coilision scenarios between vessels passing through area are sufficiently
the far
apart for two or more different risk of collision
encounters not to coincide.
7. Around Breeveertien
and West Rijn Wind Parks: The IMO variant provides greater
clearance between shipping and the wind parks than Note that clearance
variant 1. is
stili less than a miie near the the 0ff
end of Texel extended southwest bound lane, but
the junction shadowed
by the wind park is a diverging one so there is not a high risk of
a potentially
dangerous crossing encounter being obscured.
Implicit in the selection of IMO
Variant was the utilization of the majority of the listed Risk
Control Options. The remaining
RCOs are directed at reducing residual risk after
implementation
of the IMO Variant and can be summarised as follows:
- application of the International Regulations for
Preventing Collisions at Sea 1972
(COLREGS);
- risk aware design, construction
and operation of licensed wind parks;
- a review of ETV
capacity; and
review of
- a the extend of VTS control areas.
This FSA study conciudes that the proposed routeing will
measures lead to additional
distances for commercial
traffic and associated costs. It is noted that additional distances
incurred commercial
by traffic are small and within the lirnits of error when considering
individual foreign going vessels that transit the routes prior
to or after making long ocean
passages. Even so, this figure escalates a large
to amount when considering all vessels that
enter the ports of Rotterdam
and Ijmuiden on an annual basis. The additional mileage, and
therefore is more
costs, readily feit by those individual vessels which frequent
the ports on a
daily basis and ciassed as regular runners, that is, ferries,
feeder vessels and similar.
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00
Page: 9 of 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
