Project:
P60151/1
Client:
Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCALNS
2.
External Hazard Influences
The following external data were gathered
to give a most realistic and objective approach to the
HAZID findings:
1. Near Misses in the
Approaches to Ijmuiden
2.
Exploration of Small Oil/Gas Fields (changes since 2008)
3. Offshore Wind parks
4. Increased Tanker Traffic for Port of
Amsterdam (changes since 2008)
5. Near Misses
from Oil/Gas Platforms (Present Situation)
The main observations are first
summarized below. Readers interested in detailed descriptions of
the nature
of the external hazard influences are referred to the paragraphs thereafter.
2.1 Main
observations
1.
Near misses in the approaches to IJmuiden and near misses with oil and/or gas platforms
are
of great significance and readily illustrate the need for more
organisation of shipping in the
area under consideration and the assets.
Giving greater control and influence to VTS could
be a mitigating
factor and a fact finding visit to the VTS station confirrned the need for
this
additional control.
2. The near misses in the approaches
to IJmuiden are disturbing in that all the incidents relate to
the misinterpretation
and/or understanding of the Collision Regulations. The situation for the
approaches to IJmuiden can be improved by:
• designation of a TSS;
• better utilization of the VTS of the competent
authority at IJmuiden (CNB), giving them
greater control and authority;
in addition to
• repositioning of the
existing anchorage areas.
3. It is dear that the Dutch government is proactive in their commitment
and support to wind
parks as a form of sustainable However,
energy. this commitment and progress must be in
line with an established
safety regime.
4. The existing wind parks, PAWP and OWEZ (numbered
as ‘32’ and ‘33’ respectively in the
maps of the three different
traffic scenarios examined in the FSA) have proved successful
which has
laid a firm foundation for the encouragement for further exploration
which is
evidenced in the 12 licensed wind parks under consideration.
5. The trend with dear
is up optimism from Amsterdam Port which has maintained its position
in the
fourth place of European ports. Tanker traffic is clearly on the increase and
measures
must be in place to address this trend.
6. Concern registered
is at the apparent indiffererice to the safety zones around wind park
and
oil/gas assets. 2010 over 2009 saw a 72% increase in violations of Safety Zones.
2.2
Near misses in the approaches to Ijmuiden
The Centraal
Nautisch Beheer, Central Nautical Management (CNB), of the so-called
Dutch
“Noordzeekanaal” (the canal leading from Amsterdam to IJmuiden),
is the VTS Administration
in the North Sea Canal Area and also lock operator
of the North Sea Locks Ijmuiden. Authority
of CNB encompasses not
only the locks and the canal, but also the North Sea approaches
to
IJmuiden,
as follows:
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00
Page: 160f 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
