Project: P60151/1
Client: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
3. HAZID Methodology
3.1 Introduction
The ARCADIS (UK) HAZID is based on a marmer’s qualitative
view of the risk and is mainly a
approach, though it does give a numerical level of risk to each identified hazard to allow a
comparison between the three differént traffic systems to be made.
The HAZID method employed uses a team based approach which incorporates a structured
brainstorming technique used to draw out information from the participants. The aim is to
identify hazards capable to leading to undesirable
consequences as well as the current and
recommended
control measures for each hazard.
The team is made up of appropriately qualified persons. The activity under review is broken
down into tasks and steps. As each step is identified and they are in turn assessed for potential
hazards. The hazards are further assessed in terms of the associated consequences and frequency
of occurrence.
3.2 Study Areas
The Hazid was initiated by subdividing the area to
be considered into three sectors:
1. Section A Offshore Routing
2. Section B
Inshore Routing
3. Section C Secondary Traffic
These sectors were further subdivided and addressed the individual routes/channels therein
accordingly.
3.2.1 Section A: Offshore Routing
1
NNE / SSW Offshore deepwater route between the North Hinder and the 0ff Brown Ridge
TS S.
2 The sea area between the off shore deep water route and the SW going route from the 0ff
Texel TSS to the North Hinder Nord TSS.
3 SW bound through lane to the North Hinder buoy from the 0ff Texel TSS.
4 Sea area between the SW and NE going routes between the North Hinder North and the 0ff
Texel TSSs.
5 NE going through lane from the North Hinder buoy to the 0ff Texel TSS.
3.2.2 Section B: Inshore Routing
6 The Noord Hinder Junction Precautionary Area.
7 Maas West TSS
8 Maas Northwest TSS from
the NE going lane between the North Hinder North and the 0ff
Texel TSSs
9 Maas Central Precautionary Area
10 MaasNorthTSS.
11 Routes between Ijmuiden
and the NE bound lane between the North Hinder North and the
0ff Texel TSSs.
3.2.3
Section C: Secondary Traffic
12 Rook of Holland to IJmuiden Port Area
13 IJmuiden
to Texel.
Date:
Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00 Page: 33of 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
