bt
Project:
P60151/1
Client:
Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
vessel
involved in a close quarters encounter, as seen from
the other. How each ship
should behave in the three different
types of encounter is explained in part II of the Rules
entitled “conduct of vessels in
sight of one another”.
The aspect angle of another seen from
ship one’s own vessel is its bearing relative to one’s own
ship’s heading. The side and
masthead lights of each ship are visible to the other in ‘endon’ and
‘crossing’ encounters
and the aspect angle in ‘end on’ encounters
is within about 3° of dead
ahead whilst ‘crossing’ encounters are defined an
by aspect angle of between 3° and 112.5°.
‘Overtaking’ encounters occur at aspect
angles greater than 112.5° when the side and masthead
lights of the overtaking
vessel ship can be seen from the ship being overtaken but overtaking
the
vessel will
only see the stem light of the ship that it is overtaking.
A risk of collision exists if the
aspect angle of another vessel remains constant but
at a decreasing range whilst one’s own ship
maintains a constant heading
Small aspect angle close encounters
quarters are characterised by:
(a) A fast closing speed between the two
ships.
(b) Reducing speed only increases the the
time to point of nearest approach (or collision),
whereas a small of
alteration course to starboard by the give way vessel will avoid the
collision (both
ships must alter course to starboard in an end encounter).
on
Large aspect angle
encounters can cause doubt as to whether the two ships are in crossing
a or an
overtaking encounter,
as defined by the Rule of the Road. The characteristics
of crossing close
quarters encounters are as follows:
(c) A slow closing speed between the two
ships where the stand on vessel can appear to be
overtaking and so may not imrnediatcly
give the bridge watch keeper on the give way ship
cause for concern
until the range between the two ships has reduced considerably.
(d) The stand on vessel
will be the faster of the two ships when seen from the give way ship
with au aspect angle greater than 60° to starboard. At aspect angles
much larger than this
(but less than 112.5°), it would only require the
stand on vessel to make a relatively small
course alteration to starboard
to avoid collision the Rules state that the stand on vessel
must maintain
its course and speed until collision cannot be avoided by the action of
the
give ship alone.
The give
way vessel must make a large initial alteration of course starboard present
to to its port
side to the stand on vessel (over 90° if the stand
on vessel is abaft the beam). A significant
reduction in speed is effective avoiding
at collision and a less drastic action for the give way ship
to take, especially in
restricted waters, but it is not immediately so apparent stand on
to the
vessel
(however, it should soon be indicated by ARPA radar).
Collisions between two isolated
ships are reLatively easy to avoid in close quarters crossing
encounters at small
aspect angles, as only small deviation to starboard by the ship
give way is
required.
The situation is more problematic when ship attempts
a to cross a stream of traffic at a
small aspect angle, as the stream of traffic is
going in predominately the opposite direction so the
lone crossing ship will remain
moving against the flow of traffic and is likely to have more close
quarters encounters
with other vessels than if it crossed the stream at right at
angles aspect
angles in the region of 45°.
Large
aspect close quarters crossing encounters can high risk of collision if the slower
ship is the
give way vessel because its watch keeper will see
the other ship’s port side fairly square on a bit
abaft the beam at a fairly steady range
and bearing but that is what he would expect if the other
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00
Page: 39of 192
Doc: P60151/1
— Netherlands Wind park FSA
