Project: P60151/1
Client: Port of Rotterdam
Netherlands
Title: Wind park FormaT Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
ship was overtaking, so that is what he might assume, in which case it must keep dear of him.
However, the watch will clearly see the slower ship’s starboard side
keeper on the faster vessel
doubt that was vessel,
and side light on his port side, so he would be in no he the stand on
especially at night because he would not see the slower ship’s stem light. Hence the watch
keeper on the give way ship may not realise his peru until the range between the two ships is
900
close which or so towards the stand on vessel is a
alarmingly at point the prospect of altering
drastically
highly unattractive option and the action to take would be to slow down.
The risk in overtaking encounters arises from the fact that the difference in speeds between the
two ships involved is often less a than a knot, so overtaking situations can last for hours, during
which each to take evasive action if either one or both of them
ship restricts the other’s ability
becorne involved in a close quarters encounter with a third vessel.
the traffic situations in
In order to attempt to maintain a consistency in the assessment of three
the introduction, the FSA identified the following different types of risk of collision between
ships:
1) Crossing encounters where the ships’ courses are within approximately 20° of a right angle
to each other. (This is the most straight forward crossing situation with regard to
complying of a collision is mainly based on
with the Rule of the Road and the frequency
the density of traffic.)
after
2) Close quarters encounters when a ship joins or crosses a traffic stream immediately
weighing its anchor. (This is a particularly hazardous situation because the ship leaving the
anchorage will be changing its course and speed, so traffic in the adjacent lane will not
have It not good searnanship to create an
sufficient time to determine its intentions.
immediate close quarters situation when leaving a berth or anchorage.)
of traffic or where
3) Close quarters encounters between ships where ships join a stream
streams of traffic merge at large aspect angles. (Close quarters encounters between ships in
these situations may be crossing or overtaking situations, depending on whether or not the
the added complication that more of the ships
aspect angle is less than 112.5°, with one or
It is a
involved is very likely to alter course in order to follow the new common track.
particularly hazardous situation when there is restricted sea room to take evasive action,
such as currently exists at the entrance to the northeast bound lane of the 0ff Texel traffic
a wreck middle of the
separation scheme, which is partially blocked by almost in the
approach to the lane.)
(There
4) Close quarters encounters where ships leave or diverge from a stream of traffic.
should not be a collision between ships on diverging courses bit if the ship about to alter
course is stream of traffic to leave it, then it may cut across the bows of
poorly placed in a
collide with one of them contribute to a collision
other vessels astern of it and so or
between two of the ships astern as they take evasive action to avoid running into the ship
that has just cut across their bows. One place in the IMO variant where there is a risk of
this occurring approach to the deep-water route leading to Europoort, as
is the extended
the North Hinder South northeast bound lane, so
this lines up with the western boundary of
ships entering the deep-water route from the southwest will cut across traffic for the North
Hinder North northeast bound lane.)
Each of traffic systems inciude locations where several of the above risks of collision exist, such
as complex junctions where the traffic crosses at angles close to 90° but some ships will
most of
bound in a different direction the stream that they
leave one stream of traffic to join another to
have just left. The FSA assesses each type of risk separately in these cases.
Date: Created Page: 400f 192
on 27/03/2012 14:12:00
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
