Project:
P60151/1
Client:
Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Assessment
Safety
ARCADIS
The FSA
considered the risk of a collision between an offshore
oil or gas platform and ships in
transit to be relatively low, provided platforms
that the are either on the boundary of a traffic
lane or outside it completely. Most
damage to offshore installations caused by ships done
is by
support
vessels (rig supply vessels, standby vessels etc.) legitimately
working within the 500
metre
exclusion zone around the installation, though fishing
vessels have been known to illegally
get too close and cause problems. In
either case, these particular hazards cannot be prevented by
any traffic routeing measure. However,
the Horizon oil platform currently is vulnerable
to
shipping
because it is in the middle of a traffic stream
bound for Schouwenbank from the 0ff
Texel
southwest bound lane and, furthermore, the platform
is sited where several streams of
traffic cross about two and half
a miles northwest of the outer limit of the approaches to
IJmuiden. Consequently.
this risk is higher for both the present situation and the Variant
1 option
than
for the IMO variant, which reduces crossing encounters
close by the platform and moves
traffic from 0ff Texel to Schouwenbank away the
from platform.
The
De Ruyter gas platform and single buoy mooring
is also in a very congested area but the
AlS traffic plot shows ships giving it berth.
a wide The IMO Variant, nevertheless, has been
designed to keep traffic
at least two miles dear of the installation.
The Rijn gas platform
is well outside of current traffic flows but the key component the IMO
of
Variant proposal
is the to move the Maas North traffic separation scheme
about four miles to the
west, which will put the Rijn platform in the middle
of the Maas North separation zone, which
obviously increases the risk of a ship
colliding with it. However, the separation scheme will be
bounded on both
sides by wind parks in the vicinity of the platform and are
there enough
underwater
obstructions in the form of gas pipelines, wells power
and cables to deter fishing
activities, so there should not be much traffic
crossing the Maas North scheme in this vicinity,
except for vessels supporting the
gas field.
The risk of grounding on an underwater
obstruction within the IMO Variant traffic streams is
very low now that the
proposed changes to the approach to the 0ff Texel northeast bound lane
will move
traffic dear of the wreck that currently blocks of nearly
half the lane’s entrance. The
risk from the two ammunition dumps that lie in the
proposed Maas North separation zone has
been assessed separately by TNO
and is explained further on page 32.
The FSA follows the guidance given
in the UK Maritime and Coastguard Agency’s (MCA)
Marine Guidance Notices
MGN 371 and 372 and assumed the frequency of a collision between
a ship
and a wind turbine to be negligible if the clearance from the
wind park is greater than 2
miles but this increased to an ‘L’ value of 2 where
clearance is between 1 and 2 miles and an T’
value of 5 where the clearance half
is a mile or less.
3.8 Estimating the
consequence rating ‘C’ for each identified hazard
The consequences of two ships colliding
at speed vary widely, as they depend on:
(i) The possible loss of life. A ship’s size is indication
no of the number of persons onboard or
the risk that a collision
poses to their lives. Small ships, such as survey vessels, may have
at least as many
persons onboard as a large ocean going vessel, whilst ferries
small will
have many more passengers onboard. Small ships more
are also likely to sink after a
collision and sink fast, so time to evacuate the
people onboard can be very limited.
(ii) Damage to the ship, which can range from some plates
buckied all the way up to one or
both of the ships being lost
through sinking, fire and or explosion. With regard to a ship
staying afloat,
an IMO ‘Focus’ article on roll on - roll off vessels stated casualty
that
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00
Page: 41 of 192
Doc: P60151/1
— Netherlands Wind park FSA
