Project: P60151/1
Client: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
statistics suggest that these ships have about a 83% frequency of staying afloat after a
collision whereas the chances increase to 91% for other somewhat at
ship types. This is
odds with the subdivision regulations in chapter part
11-1. B of SOLAS that requires all
ships
of 80 metres in Iength or more and built after 1982 to be designed with a level of
survivability that is determined by the ship’s Length and, in the case of passengers hips, the
number of passengers that they are certified to Carry. required
The minimum survivability
is given a required subdivision index ‘R that
by ranges for cargo ships from 0.36 for ships
of
80 metres in length to 0.60 for ships of 220 metres in length. A ship’s actual subdivision
index is calculated by assessing the frequencies for all the different possible damage
scenarios occurring and the chances of the ship scenario
remaining afloat after each has
occurred. The required subdivision
minimum index ‘R’ is based on an analysis of the
outcomes of over one hundred collisions between ships and so it roughly represents a
probability of a ship surviving a random collision. This suggests hundred 80
that if one
metre long cargo vessels built to the minimum
required subdivision were each involved in
a collision, about
then only 36 of thern would stay afloat afterwards.
(iii) Damage which often
to the cargo, is worth much more than the ships carrying it.
(iv) The cost of pollution
clearing up any that resulted from oil tanks being ruptured or cargo
spaces being flooded and 50 allowing the sea to be contaminated through seepage.
(v) Salvage costs, which would inciude the cost of ships being towed away for repairs (an
expensive operation for large ships that can only be repaired in a limited number of
shipyards) and the cost of those repairs.
(vi) The costs due to any delays in port operations and ship movements caused collision
by and
the necessary clearing up afterwards, partially
such as would follow a collision that
blocked an important channel.
Given that the types likely to
of ships be involved in collision at any of the identified hazards are
not known exactly the FSA allocates a consequence rating of ‘3’ for any collision between two
unspecfled ships moving at speed. The consequence rating is reduced to ‘2’ for collisions at
slow manoeuvring speeds and increased to ‘4’ if a
collision possibly involves a loaded tanker.
The FSA
gives the highest consequence rating of ‘5’ to a collision between a ship moving at
speed and a gas platform or going aground on a subsea production well and rupturing it but only
allocates a consequence rating of ‘2’ for a collision between a ship and a wind turbine (the FSA
does not consider damage to more than one
turbine).
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00 Page: 42 of 192
Doc: P60151/1 Netherlands Wind park FSA
