Project: P60151/1
Client: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands V/ïnd park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
4. Resuits of Hazard Identification & Risk Assessment (Steps 1 & 2)
4.1 Hazard and Risk tables
The HAZID worksheets are inciuded in the appendices, follows:
as
- Appendix 1: Present traffic routeing worksheet, representing the present traffic routeing
structure and the assumed realization of Q1O wind park;
- Appendix 2: Variant 1 traffic routeing worksheet, assuming that all round 2 wind parks
are realized, but the traffic routes remain as they are;
- Appendix 3: IMO variant traffic routeing worksheet.
The worksheets yield the following locations attention (for
in particular that require detailed
numbers of the described points see also Figure 12 to Figure 14).
The “present traffic routing” worksheets show that dangerous situations (red risk scores or high-
end yellow scores around the value 12) occur for the following locations and situations:
- Horizon Platform — Figure 12 and Appendix 1, Point 5g: SSW going ships for
Schouwenbank, WSW going ships and draft ships cross NE
NWxN/ SExS going deep
going traffic close to the Horizon gas platform. The gas platform is right on the Western
edge of the NE and SSW going traffic lanes. Concern exists that NWxN and WSW going
vessels alter course towards the gas platform when giving way.
- Entrance to 0ff Texel TSS — Figure 12 and Appendix 1, Point 5j: NExE, NExN and
NxNE going ships merge with NE going traffic at the entrance to the 0ff Texel TSS
where the width of the approach to the NE lane width is halved by the buoyed Vinca
Gorthon wreck at a depth of 1O.8m. Close quarters situations between merging traffic at
large aspect angles can cause doubt as to whether it is crossing or an overtaking
a
situation and which is the stand on vessel. The wreck precludes a large course alteration
to starboard, 50 a give way ship in this situation should reduce speed.
- Approaches to IJmuiden - Figure 12 and Appendix 1, Point ila: ENE going ships
pass the site for wind park Q1O to starboard at a minimum clearance of about O.5nm.
This presents
a risk of a ship colliding with a vessel engaged in constructing the wind
park or of a ship breaking down and drifting into a wind turbine. Point lie: NxE going
inbound ships merge with all ExS going inbound traffic at the inner fairway buoy,
leading to close quarter situations at large aspect angles. This can cause doubt as to
whether
it is a crossing or an overtaking situation and which is the stand on vessel. Point
lig: All WxN going outbound traffic and ExS inbound deep draft vessels pass the inner
anchorage. Ships may join the inbound lane from the anchorage from the port side, which
means that must give way to all WxN going traffic but at the same time they are the stand
on vessel to ExS going deep draft vessels in a close quarters situation. This creates an
ambiguous situation in terms of colregs. Point 11h: Inbound SSE going ships from the
north cross all W going outbound and E going inbound deep draft traffic at the west end
of the inner anchorage. but
W going traffic must give way to SSE going ships vessels
restricted to the narrow deep-water channel may have difficulty complying with this
obligation. Point lii: NxW going ships from the Maas North TSS cross all E going
inbound and W going outbound traffic. Inbound E going traffic must give way to NxW
going ships but vessels difficulty
restricted to the narrow deep-water channel may have
complying with this obligation. Point lij: NNE bound ships from Schouwenbank and S
bound traffic for the Maas North TSS cross inbound ENE and outbound W going traffic.
NNE going ships must give way to W going traffic, which must give way to S going
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00 Page: 430f 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
