Project:
P60151/1
Client: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
ships, which must give way to inbound E going traffic that must give
way to NNE going
ships. However, E and W going vessels restricted
to the narrow deep-water channel may
have difficulty complying
with their obligations under ‘Colregs’ Rule 16 (see also Rules
8, 9 and 18).
The
outer approaches to IJmuiden — Figure 12 and Appendix 1, Point 5f:
SxE going
ships must give way to ExN and NE going
ships and NE going traffic must give way to
WxS going ships, where IJmuiden
ships for the outer approaches diverge from the NE
as they
going lane turn to go WxN. This can lead to a poorly positioned vessel cutting
across ahead of a ship astern.
Traffic from and to Sunk East - Figure 12 and
Appendix 1, Point la and 6h: In point
la NE/SW going ships
to and from Sunk East TSS cross NS going traffic in the deep
This may
water route. result in south going deep water traffic having to give way to
NE
going
ships which at the same time must give way to deep water traffic which also
at the
same time must give way to SW going ships,
which finally have to give way to South
going deep water traffic. This a
creates very confusing situation. A similar situation
point
occurs at 6h.
At
Brown Ridge/ De Ruyter — Figure 12 and Appendix 1, point 3b, 4i: At point
3b,
nearer to Brown Ridge also close quarter situations
between ships moving at very
different speeds from all directions converge
at large aspect angles and can cause doubt
as to whether it is a crossing
or an overtaking situation and which is the stand on vessel.
A similar situation occurs at point 4i.
Approaches to and from Hook of Holland Appendix
— Figure 12 and 1, point 7h and
7j: Multiple crossing at poor aspect angles
between traffic to and from Kook of Holland
and to and from Schouwenbank
occur in this area. Traffic to and from Schouwenbank
also crosses the deep water route in this area. Vessels in the deep water route
are
restricted in their ability to take avoiding action.
Maas centre precautionary — Figure
area 12 and Appendix 1, point 9e, 9g and 9h:
Ships from Maas North
TSS must alter course to starboard to approach the pilot station
the
whilst at same time being stand on vessels for outbound traffic in a close quarters
crossing encounter. Traffic from Maas North TSS and
Maas Northwest TSS have to
cross the deep water channel to approach
the pilot station and inbound ships from Maas
West TSS cross
the area to approach Scheveningen pilot station. This results in multiple
crossing in the precautionary area.
Furthermore. if all round 2 wind parks will
be built in the future, the following additional points
of concern arise (see
red risk scores in the “Variant 1 traffic routing” Worksheet):
Breeveertien vind
park - Figure 13 and Appendix 2, Point 3e: W going vessels
from
IJmuiden cross SW going traffic close to the Breeveertien wind park
site. W going
vessels then must give way to SW
going traffic. In poor visibility situations, the wind
park, however,
will obscure onboard visual and radar detection of a close quarters
between
situation SW and W going ships until the range is only about 2mls.
West Rijn wind park - Figure 13 and Appendix 2, Point SSW going vessels
8d: for
Schouwenbank cross NW/SE going traffic in and out of
the Maas Northwest TSS. NW
going traffic must give way to going
SSW ships, which in turn must give way to SE
going traffic. In
poor visibility situations, the nearby West Rijn wind park will obscure
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00
Page: 440f 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
