Project: P60151/1
CIent: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
onboard visual and radar detection quarters situation between NW and SSW
of a close
going ships until the range between them is only about 4 miles.
- Existing Princess Amalia wind park - Figure 13 and Appendix 2, Point ho: NE/SW
going vessels pass the existing Princess park to starboard with no clearance.
Amalia wind
park
Small vessels, such as maintenance craft emerging without warning from the wind
or a ship breaking down and drifting into a wind turbine could pose a hazard and result in
ship-ship or ship-turbine collisions. A collision between a ro-ro passenger ferry and a
wind turbine could, moreover,
have severe consequences.
In the Worksheets of the IMO variant the above points of attention colour yellow or gren,
indicating that the bottlenecks have been solved. Note that no new red scores are incurred either.
Looking HAZID ascribed to the following
into the worksheet in the appendices, this can be
features of the proposed IMO variant routeing design.
1. Around Horizon platform: In the 1M0 variant, the extended southwest bound traffic
lane of the 0ff Texel traffic separation scheme obliges ships for Schouwenbank via the
amended Maas Junction precautionary area to continue in the southwest lane until they
reach the south bound branch lane, south-southwest as soon as they
rather than turning
exit the current traffic lane. This reduces the traffic passing through the current ‘hot spot’
at the Horizon nianned oil platform. Furthermore, re-aligning the northeast bound lane of
North Hinder North traffic separation scheme directs vessels to pass the Horizon
platform greater distance
at a than it currently does.
2. Entrance 0ff the Maas North to the 0ff
to Texel TSS: In the IMO variant, ships from
Texel traffic separation schemes are directed to join northeast going traffic about 10
mules southwest of where they currently do and so the congestion of merging traffic that
currently occurs at the soutli end of the 0ff Texel northeast bound lane is reduced. The
northeast bound traffic
adjusted boundaries of the 0ff Texel traffic separation scheme’s
lane also puts the Vinca Gorthon wreck outside of the lane, so effectively increasing the
lane’s width.
3. The approaches to Ijmuiden: Traffic between the Maas North and the Texel traffic
separation schemes is directed to cross the deep-water route leading to IJmuiden in a
draft vessels have room to
precautionary area west of the deep-water channel and so deep
take the proper evasive action in risk of collision encounters. Furthermore, the traffic
separation scheme in the approaches to IJmuiden will prevent the crossing encounters
between inbound and outbound traffic that currently occur, whilst north and south going
allows for more
ships cross the scheme in just the two precautionary areas. This
anchorage areas on the south side of the separation scheme so that inbound ships do not
cross the outbound lane when arriving at or departing from the anchorages.
4. The outer approaches to Ijmuiden: Due to the shifting of Maas North TSS
approximately 5 miles to the West, traffic to and from this TSS now crosses in and out
precautionary area.
going traffic to IJmuiden West of the deep water route in a new
that sufficient distance exists
5. Traffic from and to Sunk East: It has been conciuded
route.
between the North and South going traffic in the deep water
Ridge/ from the south going branch
6. At Brown De Ruyter: The recommended route
directs traffic for Schouwenbank to cross northeast bound traffic for the 0ff Texel traffic
separation scheme and northwest!southeast traffic in and out of the Maas Northwest
traffic separation scheme in the new Rij nveld precautionary area. The area’s shape and
orientation that the different of risk of
the of its boundaries have been designed so
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00 Page: 45 of 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
