____________________
Project: P60151/1
dient: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
4.2 The HAZID comparison of the three different traffic routcing systems
The HAZID total level of risk scores for three different
traffic systems are shown in Figure 15.
Risk Score
1400
1200
Variant 1
Present situatton
Wind park is IMO Variant 12.12.11
‘Q10’
aiIvte
under construction
800
All the wind parks
current traffic
with the current
except for the
separation schemes
- traffic routeing
600
Scheveningen park
and precautionary
measures in place
are in place with the
areas connected by
400
Risk score: 1254 proposed routeing
recommended
measures
routes
200 -
Score:
1028
Score: 1226
0.
Figure 15. Comparison of total level of HAZID risk scores for the IMO Variant and the two baseline
Variants
IMO variant 12.12.11 has a significantly lower level of risk than either of the other two systems.
It may seem strange that the present situation without wind parks should have a higher risk score
than the Variant 1 option, as this keeps all the traffic separation schemes and precautionary
areas
in their current
forrns with the additional hazards that the presence of the wind parks might pose
to shipping. It is possible that the wind parks themselves have a regulating effect on ships’
movements in the saine way that traffic islands help to regulate road traffic but road vehicles can
only go where roads are built and also are bound highway laws to stay in the lanes
by allocated
to them. Variant 1 atternpts to replicate this by projecting the route-selection of ships in this
situation (based on MARIN data) and the FSA is based that ships use these routes. This goes
some way to explain why variant 1 has a slightly lower risk score than the present situation, as
the wind parks between the northeast and southwest bound
lanes between North Hinder and
Texel would reduce the number of different crossing encounters that can occur in this area.
However, recommended routes are not mandatory in the same way that separation schemes are
and ships can gojust about anywhere, providing
there is sufficient depth of water for their drafts,
so there is no guarantee that all the ships in the
area would follow the recommended routes, even
if they were adopted by the IMO. Furthermore, some of the locations where these routes pass
very close to wind parks are where traffic flows cross and so obscure shipboard AlS, radar and
visual detection of a close quarters encounter
developing until the vessels involved have passed
dear the wind parks’ shadows, by which time the range between them is uncomfortably close for
assessing the situation and taking the appropriate evasive action.
Taking all factors into consideration, the difference between the risk scores for the present
situation and the Variant 1 option is almost certainly within the FSA processes’ limits of error
and should not be given any real significance.
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00 Page: 49 of 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
