Project: P60151/1
Client: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands \Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
4.3 Comparison to resuits of QRA: quantitative risk assessment
MARIN applied the ship movements database to carry out a computerised quantitative risk
assessment (QRA), which simulates ships moving between selected way points (ends of traffic
separation schemes, pilot stations, that, if the
anchorages etc.) at a very much accelerated rate 50
ships are started at a random times over the period being assessed and they are moving at a
scaled up range of real speeds, then the programme can count up the number of close quarters
encounters that could be expected to occur over the period being assessed. The programme then
assesses the frequency of based
a coilision occurring at each of these close quarters encounters,
on the angie between the two vessels’ courses and their relative speeds. Although a collision
between two vessels is perhaps the main risk, stranding and collisions between a vessel and a
wind turbine or offshore platform are also taken into account.
The software must be programmed with a definition of a close quarters encounter (e.g. two
vessels passing less than half a miie of each other) and MARIN divide close quarters encounters
into three categories, namely: ‘overtaking’ where the difference in courses is less than 60°,
‘crossing’
where the difference in courses is between 60° and 150° and ‘end on’ where the
1500 1800.
difference in courses is between and It must be noted that these definitions are not the
same as those given in the “International regulations for preventing collisions at sea” (otherwise
known as the ‘Colregs’ or the should
‘Rule of the Road’), which state the rules by which ships
behave in each of these three types of a close quarters encounter (see pages 5 to 10).
Consequently, the MARIN QRA does not take the possible actions of ships’ officers into
account biit, as its aim is to compare the levels of risk for the three different traffic situations
iisted in the introduction,
the comparison will be vaiid, provided that the same assumptions are
applied to each of the three assessments.
The MARIN QRA came to the same conclusion though its reasoning is slightly different as it
considered
the main reduction in risk with the wind parks in place would be due to the extra
clearance from shipping routes that the ‘IMO Variant’ provides, compared with leaving the
traffic routeing measures as they currently are. The QRA actualiy predicts a slight increase in
collisions between ships due to traffic being in fewer routes but it admits that
more concentrated
it cannot quantify the effect that rationalising the traffic flows has on how ships’ officers react to
close quarters encounters. The FSA, based on the marmer’s view of the situation, may have
judged this aspect of the risk analysis better but both methods of risk assessment have their
limitations.
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00 Page: 50 of 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
