Project: P60151/1
Client: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wnd park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
5. (Residual) Risk Control Options (Step 3)
The following risk control options have been discussed during the HAZID study and
directly incorporated into the design of the IMO Variant:
1. Establishing a traffic separation scheme in the approaches to IJmuiden to keep inbound ships
south of the deep-water channel and outbound ships
north of it prevents the crossing
encounters between these two traffic flows
that currently occur. It also restricts the crossing
north
of these lanes by and south going vessels to within the two proposed precautionary
areas and so provides more anchorage areas on the south side of the separation scheme
so
that inbound ships do not cross the outbound lane
when arriving at or departing from the
anchorages.
2. Moving the Maas North traffic scheme
separation 4.5 miles to the west directs traffic moving
Maas North
between the the Texel traffic separation schemes to cross the deep-water route
leading to IJmuiden in a precautionary area west of the deep-water channel and deep
so draft
vessels have room to take the proper evasive action in
risk of collision encounters. The
westward move of the traffic
separation scherne also directs ships bound for the 0ff Texel
scheme
traffic separation to join northeast going traffic about 10 miles southwest of where
they currently do and so reduces the congestion of merging that currently occurs
traffic at the
start of the 0ff Texel northeast bound
lane.
3. Arnending the Maas West Inner and Outer traffic schernes
separation to accommodate
rnoving the Maas North traffic scherne
separation 4.5 rniles to the west improves the crossing
angle of north/south going vessels with east/west going traffic in the amended Maas Junction
precautionary area.
4. The adjustment to the boundaries of the 0ff Texel traffic separation scheme’s northeast
bound traffic lane puts the Vinca Gorthon wreck outside of the so effectively
lane, increasing
the lane’s width.
5. Extending the southwest bound traffic
lane of the 0ff Texel traffic separation scheme 25
miles southwestwards
to a south going branch lane obliges ships for Schouwenbank via the
arnended Maas Junction precautionary area to stay in the southwest lane until they reach
the
branch lane, rather than turning south-southwest as the current
soon as they exit traffic lane,
which puts them directly on course
for the ‘hot spot’ at the Horizon manned oil platform.
6. Establishing a recommended route from the
south going branch in paragraph ‘5’ directs
traffic for Schouwenbank
to cross northeast bound traffic for the 0ff Texel traffic separation
scherne and northwest/southeast traffic in and out of the Maas Northwest traffic separation
scheme in the new Rijnveld precautionary area. The area’s and the orientation
shape of its
boundaries have been designed so the different
that of risk of collision scenarios between
vessels passing through
the area are sufficiently far apart for two or more different risk of
collision encounters not to coincide.
7. Re-aligning the northeast bound lane of North Hinder North traffic separation scheme directs
vessels to pass the Horizon platform at a greater distance than currently
it does.
8. Extending the current traffic zone inshore of the Maas West Inner traffic separation scheme
to include the entrance to the Oosterschelde allows vessels trading
small coastal between the
Maas and the Oosterschelde inshore
to use the traffic zone, instead of going through the
Maas Inner traffic
West separation scheme and the Maas Junction precautionary area and
so
reduces the traffic in these congested areas.
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00
Page: 5lof 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
