Project: P60151/1
Client: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wïnd park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
9. IMO variant 12.12.11 provides greater clearance between shipping and the wind parks than
variant 1. Clearance is iess than a miie
near the end of the 0ff Texel extended southwest
bound lane shadowed
but the junction by the wind park is a diverging one so there is not the
risk of a potentially dangeroLis crossing encounter being obscured.
The following options for wind
park construction are furthermore suggested to mitigate
residual
risk:
1. The risk management
primary means of is the future placement of the Wind Parks
themselves
to ensure that the site selection alignment, size and layout are optima!.
2. A review lights
of marks and is recommended to ensure each Wind Park is optimally lit
and marked to aid safe navigation. This review should give account to vessels passing the
Wind Parks under normal navigation and also those that the Wind
may navigate within
Parks themselves.
It has been suggested that people can become disorientated within a
Wind Park and a small vessel may need to identify its position relative to the turbines to
aid rescue. IALA Recommendation 0-1 17 provides general advice marking of
on the
Offshore Wind parks. Temporary buoys can
be an important part of this process
especially during the construction phases, i.e. for marking a construction zone boundary.
3. Safety zones can used to exclude
be vessel navigation from the Wind Park. There are a
variety of options available, including implernentation of a full 500m safety zone around
all turbines during construction and operation, which would extinguish the rights of
navigation of vessels entirely. Alternatives to this
are to have 500m safety zone
established
around any structure that is being worked upon during the construction phase
and then reduce this to a 50m or 1 OOm safety zone when not being worked on during
construction. During the operational mode the safety zone could be set to 50/1 00/500m
or removed entirely. The current Dutch policy
inciudes the designation of temporary
safety zones during construction, as well as designation of permanent safety zones
around the turbines, so that access of all vessels to the wind parks is effectively excluded.
4. Future opening of the wind parks to small vessel traffic, for example by abolishing
permanent safety zones or reducing their size, is discussed Dutch makers. In
by policy
the event that navigation is permitted
small within the Wind Parks, it is recommended
that a minimum
safe (air) clearance be defmed. Small vessel navigation needs to be
managed to ensure these vessels are not endarigered by exiting Wind Parks into major
shipping routes undetected. Their presence in the fringes also reduces
of Wind Parks
valuable passing vessels
sea room to which may place them at increased danger.
5. An emergency service review should be carried out to ensure
an acceptable response can
stil! especially
be affected, within and in close proximity to the Wind Parks. This could
include the use of lifeboats, helicopters and emergency towing vesse!s (ETVs).
Consideration should also be given to oil spil! response
within this process.
There are number of auxiliary risk control options in the nautica! domain that can or must
be considered during implementation of the new routeing system:
6. App!ication of The International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea 1972
(COLREGS). Rules 1 — 19, as these are the rules direct!y how vessels
concerned with
should avoid collision and so are particular!y pertinent
to the assessing the risk of
co!!ision
to vessels in the traffic !anes shown in the different wind parks, relative to the
current situation (i.e. with no the wind parks).
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00 52 of 192
Page:
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
