Project: P60151/1
Client: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
7. Cable routes and
whether they are trenched, buried or exposed needs careful
consideration, to reduce the likelihood of fishing gear and anchoring interaction.
8. Pilotage can be used to reduce or manage risks around Wind Parks. A review of pilotage
is required within the area. Boarding points may benefit from relocation following the
development of the Wind Parks.
9. Anchoring is the first line of defence when vessels suffer engine await further
failure and
assistance, if required. Safe anchoring when
navigating within the confines of Wind
Parks should be carried out with the full knowledge of the VTS.
10. A review of anchorage
areas is required to ensure adequate provision is made and that
areas are appropriate in location and size, and accessible.
II. Promulgation of information and warnings through notice to mariners and other
appropriate media will reduce risks. This will inciude the marking of
appropriate
developments on navigational charts. Methods for achieving consideration
this need for
all stakeholders, recreational
including and fishing users.
12. The pattern of buoys the area is to be revised
in appropriately to mark out the traffic
lanes in the IMO Variant traffic schemes. There are also the following cardinal buoys
that possibly could be relocated or even removed.
13. An emergency towing vessel (ETV) is a most effect risk reducing measure; an ETV in
the vicinity of a concentration of wind parks drifting
can reduce the probability of a
contact considerably, namely with more than
50%. The recommendable amount of ETV
capacity for the Dutch case is discussed in chapter X.
14. An ETV typically a long
bas working aft deck with forward and aft bridge control
stations and should meet with the following requirements:
Be of sufficient size and power to render effective assistance to the largest vessels
that it is likely to be sent to in adverse weather conditions. (Suitable vessels will
typically have a sustainable bollard
puli of between 120 and 150 tonnes, an overall
length and rnetres
of between 60 70 and a displacement of between 3,500 and 4,500
tonnes. Such a vessel may not be able to tow the largest ships transiting the area, such
as a 250,000 dwt laden tanker, but it would be powerful enough the disabled
to alter
tanker’s rate and direction
of drift away from immediate danger by, for example,
pushing the tanker’s bow further into the wind.)
• Be sufficiently inanoeuvrable to hold position close enough to a disabled vessel in
adverse weather in order to pass messenger lines, a tow line etc. to it. (An ETV
should be a twin screw (preferably controllable pitch propellers) vessel
with twin
rudders and a bow thrust capability of
at least 15% of its bollard pulI.)
• Be able to carry fuel, lubrication oH and freshwater
for at least 10 days at sea at 90%
full power without conipromising the vessel’s stability
• Be equipped with a range of towing gear chafe
(towing pennants, shackies, chains,
weak different sizes
links etc. of and strengths) sufficient to assist any size of ship.
• Have the capability to fight the range of fires that
could be encountered when
assisting a disabled
vessel, as this may be necessary in order to get close enough to
the stricken ship in order to get a towline across or evacuate its crew.
Date:
Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00 Page: 53 of 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
