Project: P60151/1
dient:
Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
• Have sufficient life saving equipment, including a crash boat and trained crew, to
rescue personnel from the sea.
• Have sufficient facilities to tend to survivors’ needs, including the capacity to give
emergency first aid.
• Have sufficient dear deck space for a helicopter to winch personnel down to or up
from the ETV. (Extra personnel, particularly may have to be put
medical staff,
onboard to tend to seriously injured casualties or crew and equiprnent may need to be
transferred to the stricken vessel to assist in securing the tow.)
• Be equipped with sufficient means to deal with any pollution likely to arise from an
incident.
• Be equipped with a portable submersible pumps, a portable free standing power
supply (e. a diesel generator) and a crane of sufficient lifting capacity (typically a
g.
safe working bad of at least three tonnes) and reach to land the pumps and their
power supply onboard a stricken vessel.
• To carry a range of ernergency damage control equipment adequate for dealing with
the incidents that the vessel encounter.
is rnost likely to
• Be fitted with sufficient radio equipment to communicate with at least two other
stations (e.g. helicopter, lifeboat, coastguard etc.) on different frequencies during an
incident.
• Carry sufficient trained crew to adequately deal with a major incident. Such an
incident at critical moments could require 5 personnel on bridge (The master, ship
driver, winch / fire pump operator and 2 assistants / radio operators) 4 or 5 crew on
deck attaching the tow, deploying anti-pollution measures, launching or recovering
the crash boat etc. 3 crew in the crash boat (the driver and 2 crew to puil a person out
of the water), 2 engineers to monitor the deck and engine room machinery and 3 staff
to tend to survivors. Consequently, an ETV should carry a minimum of 1 8
specifically trained crew.
15. Near misses are stili significant in the approaches to IJmuiden and near oil/gas platforms
on the Dutch EEZ and readily illustrate the need for more organisation of shipping in the
area under consideration and the assets. Greater control and influence of VTS should be a
mitigating factor. A fact finding visit to the VTS station confirmed the need for this
additional control. VTS stations could established with greater and more extensive
be
control of the area under surveillance to aid emergency response. By definitiont a Vessel
Traffic Service is a service implemented by a competent authority,9 designed to improve
the safety and efficiency of vessel traffic and protect the environment. The service should
have the capability to interact traffic and respond to traffic situations developing
with the
in the VTS area.
The VTS can rightly be described, depending on local regulations, as ‘control of space’
of the area in which it exercises authority. Recognising at all times that Masters control
and navigate their ships within that space. In this respect the services rendered by the
VTS is best described as that of a Harbour/ Port rendering a level of service offering:
IMO Resolution A857(20) - Adopted 27.11.97
‘The’ Company
Port
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00 Page: 54of 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
