Project: P60151/1
dient: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
Traffïc Organisatioii Service which prevents the development of dangerous
• A
for safe efficient movement of
maritime traffic situations and therefore provide and
traffic within the VTS area.
to those
• An Information Service to ensure that essential information is available
requiring it.
• A Navigational Assistance Service to assist10 onboard decision making insofar as
assistance information only and in keeping with the principle that instructions/
is by
orientated’.
advice issued are ‘result
• To require compliance with National and International Law and Conventions and
and subordinate legislation.
with the provisions of the Harbours Acts
a traffic organisation service to prevent dangerous situations’ developing
• Maintain
of vessels within the
and to promote and provide for safe and efficient movement
VTS area.
the supply together with the
• A service which assists in the co-ordination of of pilots
for their intended
necessary information to assist in the formulation of a passage plan
task.
the
• Provide information relating to the Port and its approaches to ships outside
Authorities area as and when requested.
• To keep an accurate, comprehensive and auditable record of all:
• All commercial vessel movements.
• Pilotage acts.
for
• Ship/ Shore and Ship/ Ship communications a limited period.
• Incident Reports
which from time to time
Such detail will also assist with the investigation into incidents,
occur.
together with tidal
• Monitor shipping rnovements. including vessel routeing & speed,
provide timely
and shipping movements within the ports area of authority and to
information concerning hazardous situations.
• To act as coordinating authority in the event of an incident within the ports
jurisdiction and area of authority which involves other organisations, services or
authorities.
• To or Assistant Harbour Master to any incident which may
alert the Harbour Master
Emergency Plan, carry out initial alerting and
require the implementation of the Port
staff cali out role.
of contact outside normal office hours for all
• To act as the ports centra! point
incoming inquiries or information.
more localised
16. During the more detailed planning of each of the developments
navigatiorial issues require consideration as this study is conducted at a higher level.
10
to be ‘residt orientated’
to
Instructions be ‘result orientated’.
Page: 55 of 192
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00
P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
Doc:
1
