Project: P60151/1
dient: Port
of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
6.2 Travel costs for proposed routeing compared
to baseiinc scenario’s
6.2.1
Introduction
The HAZID
project team conducted a desk study to determine the change in passage distances
and associated
costs due to the proposed routeing measures. The following paragraphs include
the results and rationale of this study, subsequently discussing travel distances,
input data for
cost calculations, cost calculations and corporate
implications of cost projections. Before these
discussions,
however, a summary of the finding is provided.
6.2.2 Summary
The below figures and tables demonstrate that the
proposed routeing measures will lead to
additional distances commercial traffic
for and associated costs. It is noted that additional
distances
incurred by commercial traffic are small and within the limits of error when
considering individual foreign going vessels that transit the routes prior
to or after making long
ocean passages. Even so, this figure escalates
to a large amount when considering all vessels that
enter the ports and IJmuiden
of Rotterdam on an annual basis. The additional mileage, and
therefore costs, is more readily feit by those individual vessels which frequent the ports on a
daily basis and classed as regular runners, that is, ferries, feeder vessels
and similar.
6.2.3 Distances
Figures
1 8, 19 & 20 show the differences in travel distance between the proposed route structure
and the baseline situations for various common travels through the Dutch EEZ. information
The
is divided over three figures in order to make
the maps readable and avoid an overfiow of
information. Tabie 14 and summarizes
outlines the increase in travel distances. Particular
attention is drawn to the additional mileage incurred by the vesseis engaged in the internal
coastal trade, Schouwenbank, Rotterdam, IJmuiden.
Figure 18 dernonstrates that most proposed route structures increase the travel distances for
the
common East-West oriented routes, as follows:
- The extra distance for the proposed Schouwenbank to 0ff Texel route 2.5
(bright red) is: mis
- The
extra distance for the proposed 0ff Texel to Schouwenbank route (dark red) is: 2.5 mis
- The extra distance
for the proposed Maas Centre to 0ff Texel route (light blue) is: 2.5 mis
- The extra distance for the proposed
0ff Texel to Maas Pilot route (dark blue) is: 2.0 mis
- The extra distance for the proposed Sunk East to 0ff Texel
route (dark green) is: 5.0 mis
- The extra distance for the alternative Sunk East to 0ff Texel
route (light green) is: 5.5 mis
- The extra distance for the proposed IJmuiden to 0ff Texel route (purple) is: mIs
6.5
- The
extra distance for the proposed 0ff Texel to IJmuiden route (grey) is: 6.5 mis
- The 0ff Texel East route
to the Sunk going south of Brown Ridge (black) remains the same.
Date:
Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00 Page: 59of 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
