Project: P60151/1
dient: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Windfarm Forma! Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
Section B: Inshore Routing (present situation)
Risk
Hazardous situation Outcome to be avoided Comment
No Variant 1 location
CL R
7e Deep water area by the pilot station Possible collision between an outbound vessel Damage, pollution and 3 2 6
in the deep water channel and a vessel possible loss of life due to a
hampered in its ability to manoeuvre whilst it slow speed vessel / vessel
is picking up or disembarking a pilot by collision involving a tanker
helicopter (or launch)
Deep water channel between anchorages Possible collision between vessel in the deep Damage, pollution and 4 3 12 ‘Not impeding a vessel that is
7f
3A and 3C water channel and a ship crossing the channel possible loss of life due to a restricted by its draft’ means
to the mail inbound lane from anchorage 3A. slow speed vessel / vessel taking early action to avoid a
Ships leaving the anchorage must not impede collision involving a tanker close quarters situation such as
deep draft vessels in the channel. reducing speed (Rule 18)
Deep water channel crosses NNE / SSW Possible collision between a vessel in the deep Damage, pollution and 4 3 12
7g
going ships to and from Schouwenbank water channel and a ship crossing the channel. possible loss of life due to a
. . . Not impeding a vessel that is
NNE / SSW going vessel / vessel collision
. . restricted by its draft means
involving a tanker
._ taking early action to avoid a
close quarters situation such as
anchorage 3B Possible collision between vessel in the deep Damage, pollution and 4 3 12
7h Deep water channel by to
reducing speed (Rule 18)
the north water channel and a ship crossing the channel possible loss of life due to a
to the main inbound lane from anchorage 3B. vessel / vessel slow speed
Ships leaving the anchorage must not impede collision involving a tanker
deep draft vessels in the channel.
Ships manoeuvring to leave
7i Main outbound lane abeam anchorage 3B Possible collision with a vessel crossing the Damage, pollution and 7
the anchorage should avoid
to port outbound lane as it leaves or approaches the possible loss of life due to a
creating an immediate close
anchorage vessel / vessel collision
quarters situation as this is not
good seamanship (Rule 2)
Page: 91 of 192
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Windfarm FSA
