Project: P60151/1
dient: Port of
Rotterdam
Title:
Netherlands Windfarm Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
situation of a vessel is the course of Larger
crossing ships in recognisably restricted waters, such
as a recognised channel
deep water or traffic separation scheme or possibly heavy traffic. The
Rule requires the crossing vessel to arrange to do so in a way that is clearly not going to create
a risk of collision situation with a ship passing through route, which is
the recognisable
restricted in manoeuvrability by its size. This is
just common sense and the Rule is simply
reinforcing
the demand for the practice of good seamanship. Avoiding impeding another vessel
means that all ships should be navigated as much as possible in a way that does create risk of
imminent collisjon with other vessels but the Rule cannot
states further that where this be
avoided, vessels take the actions
must stili specfied by rules 11 — 19, to avert collision.
Rule 9 — Narrow channels
A vessel proceeding along a narrow channel or fairway should comply with the following:
• Keep as near as is safe to the edge of
the channel that is on the vessel’s starboard side.
• 1f overtaking another vessel is only made possible by the other vessel taking action to
provide adequate sea room, then the overtaking vessel must make its intentions dear by
making the appropriate sound signal. 1f the vessel to be
overtaken agrees to comply, then it
should respond
with its appropriate sound signal (see Rule 34 for sound signals). However,
nothing in this communication by signals relieves the overtaking vessel of its obligations to
obeyRule 13.
bend
• Vessels approaching a in a narrow channel should navigate with caution and sound
the appropriate signal where some obstruction obscures the view around the bend (This
usually only applies to river and canal passages).
Sound signals in open waters are rarely used in open waters except in dense fog and to draw the
attention of another vessel which is not taking evasive action to prevent a collision. Requests
for co-operation in overtaking are most likely to be made VHF but
by this is prone to all kinds
of misunderstandings,
not in the least as to whether or not the ships involved have properly
identified each other. (see UK-MCA Notice MGN 167.)
Rule also following to
9 requires the be obeyed in narrow channels or fairways:
• Vessels less than 20 metres in length and sailing vessels shall not impede the passage of
vessels that can only navigate safely in the channel.
• Vessels engaged in fishing shali not impede the passage of vessels navigating the channel.
• Vessels crossing the channel shall not impede the passage of vessels that can only navigate
safely in the channel (This is repeating Rule 8).
• Vessels shall not anchor in a narrow channel or fairway unless this is unavoidable (such as
in the case of a breakdown).
Rule 10 — Traffic separation schemes (TSS ‘s)
TSS’s are a means of separating vessels moving in opposite directions distinct
into two lanes
with a separation between them. They
zone are used in coastal waters where traffic is heavily
concentrated and Rule 10 applies to TSS’s adopted by the International Maritime Organisation
(IMO) but nothing within the Rule overrides any other rule in the regulations.
The
Rule requires through traffic to comply with the following:
of
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00 Page:
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Windfarm FSA
