Project: P60151/1
Client: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
In figure 3, the officer on watch on ship ‘A’ initially sees the port side (or its red side light at
night) of ship ‘B’ on his starboard side and he collision
so will be aware of the possible risk of in
which his ship avoid. On seeing the
must act to starboard side of ship ‘A’ on his port side, the
officer
on the bridge of ship ‘B’ will similarly realise that there is a possible risk of collision
situation in which his ship is the stand on vessel. On the risk of collision being confirmed to both
officers by observing that each other’s vessel remains officer
on a steady compass bearing, the on
ship ‘A’ turns his starboard and steers
vessel to to a pointjust aft of ship ‘B’s stem. The officer on
ship B’ sees the green sidelight of ship ‘A’ disappear as the red sidelight comes into view, so he
is immediately re-assured that the give way ship has taken appropriate that a collision
action and
is no longer possible. The alternative course
of action available to the officer on ship ‘A’ would be
to slow down to
to allow ship ‘B’ pass ahead. This can be equally effective at avoiding a collision
and requires less sea room but it not immediately obvious to the officer on the stand on ship and
whether or not the risk of a collision still exists can only be determined further series
by taking a
of compass bearings.
The above paragraph explains why altering stem,
course to go around a crossing vessel’s rather
than slowing down is so much the preferred action by officers on a give way vessel in crossing
situations, as it complies so well with Rules 8 & 16 in most cases. However, the circumstances
shown in figure 4 are an example of a case in which the view of the other
vessel’s lights does not
always provide such a dear indication of the
situation.
Figure 4 - The light visible in an overtaking/crossing
s situation with a risk of collision.
(The size of the vessels is exaggerated)
Point
of
impact
Ship B’s vector
Ship ‘B’ is borderline between a crossing and overtaking vessel.
It is not dear to the officer on the bridge of ship ‘A’ as to whether his
ship is a give way vessel in a
crossing situation or the stand on vessel in an overtaking situation. On the night the
other hand, at
officer on ship ‘B’ will assume he is overtaking 1f he sees the stem light of ship A ‘or that his is the
stand on vessel in a crossing situation if he sees ship ‘A ‘s green sidelight and masthead lights.
Rule 13 states that; “When a vessel is any doubt as to whether she is overtaking another, she
shall assume that this is the case and act accordingly” (i.e. keep dear of the vessel).
other A
problem arises when this situation occurs
during the night, as the officer on the bridge of ship
‘B’ in figure 4 will feel quite certain of his vessel’s status because he will assume either that he
is overtaking if he sees the stem light of ship ‘A’ or his ship is the stand on vessel in a crossing
situation ifhe sees ship ‘A’s sidelights and masthead lights. It is the officer
on ship ‘A’ who has
no immediate indication from the lights
of ship ‘B’ as to whether it is an overtaking or crossing
vessel and. if the latter is the case, then he will have to take evasive action ifa risk of collision
exists. It is quite easy for him to think that ship ‘B’ is overtaking. as he will see the red side light
and masthead lights of a faster ship abaft his starboard
beam with the vessel appearing
approximately sideways him.
on to
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00 174 of 192
Page:
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
