Project:
P60151/1
Client: Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
The final part of this Rule requires vessels to slow down to their minimum steerage speed ifa fog
signal from another vessel bas been heard to apparently
come from forward of the beam, except in
cases where it has been detern-tined that no risk
of collision exists. 1f necessary, the vessel should
stop in the water
and proceed with extreme care until the danger has past. (The does not say
Rule
how to determine that there is no risk of collision because, even if a target on the radar is
passing
dear. it cannot be identified for certain as the
source of the fog signal.)
In my opinion, the final this Rule does
part of not take the advances in navigational equipment
(such as
ARPA and AlS) sufficiently into account and 1 would question the wisdom of following
it in most circumstances other than when a vessel’s radar is not functioning.
Reducing a vessel’s
speed in fog from 16 to 12 knots is one thing
but to stop or creep along at a very slow speed in the
middie of a busy traffic something different
lane is altogether and T would not advise it unless the
radar shows that all the other targets have also slowed down to similar
speeds.
Conclud Ing corn ment
The Rules of the Road are drilled into all navigating officers from the start their
moment they
training to when they sit for their final certificate of competency
examination. In the past, it was
common practice lecturers
by college to encourage their students to memorise them so that they
could be
quoted word for word in the oral exarninations (and this may still be the case in some
parts of the World). 1-lowever, the rules are not totally prescriptive cannot lay
because they down
precise instructions to deal with every conceivable situation,
so they often contain phrases such as
“the practice
of good seamanship” and “as far as possible”. Consequently, they should be taken in
the spirit
of co-operating with fellow rnariners to avoid collision (though spirit of self
the
preservation can be a useful motivator as well) and applied For
with common sense. example,
small alterations of course and/or speed should
not be made 1f a risk of collision exists but they
are
quite acceptable to avoid getting into such a situation, so ships converging at the entrance of a
traffic
separation lane can usually adj List their courses and speeds to merge way that does not
in a
create a collision risk (this is au example of ships not impeding
each other).
1f the rules have a failing at all, It is the slight reluctance to openly acknowledge need to rely
the
upon navigational equipment, such as radar, AlS and
electronic charts, that are now so necessary
in areas
of high density traffic in which ships can be encountered coming from all directions.
These pieces of equipment have often been described as ‘just aids to navigation’ suggestion
with a
that they should not be fully trusted but everything used to charts
navigate a ship, from the (paper
or otherwise) to the watch keeper’s own
eyes and the compass, is an aid to navigation. It is
certainly
true that officers on the bridge must know how to use the equipment and fully
understand what it is showing them, as there is an unfortunate history
of this not being the case
when a new piece of equipment is first introduced (As
testified by the number of ‘radar assisted
collisions that occurred 1950’s
in the and 1960’s when radar on merchant ships became widely
used.)
1-lowever, properly set up radar and AlS plots can provide more precise and readily
available information about ship movements in both dear and
reduced visibility situatioris than
visual observations alone. This can allow traffic to merge
and for ships to cross. main traffic flows
without creating unnecessary
collision risks in highly congested waters, such as off the Dutch
Coast between the North Hinder light and the 0ff Texel traffuc separation scheme where the
proposed wind parks are to be built. As regards to the
wind parks themselves, It is believed that if
they are properly sited in such a congested area, they
can actually lower the risk of collisions
ocdurring by imposing
greater regulation on the directions of traffic flow in much the same way
as roundabouts and traffic islands do on the road. There was much said at the meeting in Den
Haag regarding the questionable competency of the
bridge officers on some of the ships
navigating these waters but it is still likely that even
the most incompetent officer will alter course
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00
Page: 1770f 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
