Project: P60151/1
dient:
Port of Rotterdam
Title: Netherlands Wind park Formal Safety Assessment
ARCADIS
MSC/Circ.
1053 suggests further tests that can define directional stability more precisely, such as
the ‘puil out’ manoeuvre that consists of putting the ship’s helm to amidships at the end of the
turning circie manoeuvre (see figure 5) and then measuring the decay of the rate of yaw. A
directionally stable vessel will settie on directionally
a steady heading in calm conditions but a
unstable
ship will retain a residual constant yaw rate for as long as the rudder stays amidships.
Figure 10— The puil-out manoeuvre for directionally stable unstable
and Ships
At the end of the trial turning circles to port
and starboard,
the helm is put amidships at
time 0’ and the decay in the rate of turn is
E
measured.
Ship ‘A is directionally stabie
50 turn rate dccays to zero
Ship ‘B’is directionally unstable
soa residua! turn rate persîsts
The puil-out to port and starboard will not be
identica! if the propeller affects the vessel’s
steering
The yawing moment required for a steady rate of tiirn increases more than centripetal force
the
with the rudder
angle, so the neutral point moves closer to the bow as applied helm is increased
and the steering control of a directionally unstable ship is regained at larger rudder angles. This is
measured by the ‘spiral test’, which applies helm to port or starboard by a pre-determined arnount,
say 25°, and records the resulting steady rate of turn. When this is completed, the helm is reduced
by 5° and the new steady rate of turn is recorded after which the helm is reduced a further 5°
by
and, again the
steady rate of turn is recorded before a further reduction of helm is made. The
process is repeated until the helm is 25° in reverse direction at which point, the helm sequence is
again reversed in 5° steps with the steady rate of turn being recorded for each step until the helm
is returned to its initial value and the ship has followed a double spiral track.
Rgure 11 — Results of the spiral test for directionally stable and unstable ships
-‘Ii
1
Ship ‘A’isdirectionally
stable af all helm angles
VI
• HELM TO STED
20
5’ 10” 15” 25”
25 20” 15 10’ 5’
HELMTO PORT
1-
z
z
Start
Ship ‘8’ is direcfionaliy
End unstable
0 af helm angles
0 •%%,,
Start
1-
60
less than to port and
Is)
End
5° to starboard.
When a ship is directîonally unstable below a cntical helm angle, then the steady rates and direction
of tum at smaller helm angles are determined by the ship’s rate of tum when the ivdder angle is
reduced. This is known as ‘steering hysteresis
Date: Created on 27/03/2012 14:12:00 Page: 184 of 192
Doc: P60151/1 — Netherlands Wind park FSA
