4180
UNCLASSFIED TNO report TNO-DV 2011 C485
1 1
Deliverables and rationale of risk assessment
of in
The purpose of the risk analyses is to deterrnine whether the safety shipping
hazardous, to recommend appropriate risk
the area of the munition dumps could be
levels of risk.
mitigating measures and to relate these measures to corresporiding
compared for the
The overall likelihood and effects are therefore assessed and
above route structure sceriarios, incident scenarios and a
rnentioned different
number of risk mitigating policies.
Recommended risk mitigating measures
recommend the following risk mitigation
The risk analyses have leed TNO to
similar nautical
measures for the dump sites off IJmuiden and Haak of Holland (or
m eas u res):
• Selection of the °proposed route structur&;
out by buoys with relevant
• The munition dump areas should be clearly marked
indications;
nautical charts as
• The munition dump areas should be clearly marked ori
for cargo and vessels with a draught of
Pmhibiied Areas ships with explosive
Within the restricted
more than 1 5m and Restncted Areas for all other ships,
bottom dredging or any other underwater operation
area, anchoring, trawling,
should be prohibited as a minimum;
is advised venfy whether ships
• Continuous surveillance of the dump areas to
are in compliance with regulations.
Overvlew of risk assessment resuits
The risk inciuding the mitigating measures is given in Table i for the
assessment
the present and
three route structures. The residual risks are comparable for
identified as Iow and “very low. The risk for
proposed route structure and largely
the risks are
ships carrylng explosives is identified as “moderat&. In contrast,
“high” level alternative route structure.
classified up to the for the
of the aforementioned mitigating
It is concluded that with the implementation
the present and proposed route structures ere (presumably)
measures, the risks for
with explosive cargo stay
acceptable. Attention is indicated to guararitee that ships
Note the recommended measures are a
away from the dump areas. that
are presently already
consolidation and extension of the “restricted areas” that
sites the nautical charts.
indicated above the munition dump on
UNCLASSIFIED
