Speaking note
on Nav 58/3/2
Thank you mister Chairman,
Mister Chairman, distinguished
delegates,
First of all 1 would like to point
out some discrepancies whlch we discovered In the published
documents an which have already been communicated
to the secretariat.
In document NAV/58/3/7 position 21 should be amended to 52°29’.03 North and 004° 21’.70 East
0030
and in NAV/58/3/8
position 1(a) should be amended to 52° 19.28 North and 50’.38 East; In
this document also the second
position numbered 48 should be amended to position 49.
The Netherlands weicomes this opportunity to briefly introduce the the large
to Subcommittee
nümber of
papers submltted by us on ship’s routeing in the Dutch part of the North Sea.
The present
routeing system in the Dutch part of the North Sea has been in operatlon for a
substantial periocl of time and can sald
be to have contributed to the safety of navigation in the
area concerned; however sorne shortcomlngs were recently Indicated which necessitated a review
of some of
the present measures.
Apart from that we are faced with
a growing ciemand for use of the area by others than shipping.
In order to not only improve
the safety of navigation, but also accommodate the use of the Dutch
part of the North Sea by others than shipping without jeopardizing safety of navigation, the
Netherlands carried
out a comprehensive safety study through a Formal Safety Assessment (FSA),
the results of whlch are presented in
our paper NAV 58/INF. 2
On the basis of this study the major of redesigned,
part the existing routeirig measures has been
whilst at the same time a whole new TSS was developed In the approaches to Ijmuiden.
The resuits of this
pracess can be found.ln our papers NAV 58/3/3 to NAV 58/3/10, whilst the
process itself is briefly explalned
in our document NAV 58/3/2.
The substantial documents forming
the foundation of the FSA have been made avallable to the
Sub-Committee through our paper NAV 58/!NF.2; because of the large amount of texts and
graphics and not
to further burden the secretariat of the Organization we created a special website
where those documents are avallable
to all those concerned or iriterested.
Since our proposals not only contain new routeing measures, but also amendments to existing
traffic separation systems and new and amended measures other than routelng measures and
deepwater routes, and
because they are interreiated, the Netherlands wishes to emphasize that It
is Imperative that the whole package of proposals is as integral
seen an part.
Mister Chairman distingulshed delegates
The Netherlands proposes to present Its separate submissions In the working group on ships’
routeing for whlch we have
prepared a presentation in whlch we will go Into the whole process and
the resuits of the Formal Safety Assessment almed giving distinguished fellow delegates
at our to
opportunity
to address the total revlew of routeing measures In the Dutch part of the North Sea In
detail before going
Into the assessment of the separate submissions presented by the Netherlands.
Thank you mlster Chairman.
