Table 0-1 contains the result of analysis of the ships that have crossed the area. The dumping
the
voyages of ships
area of IJmuiden has been crossed most frequently in 2010. In total, 720
voyages were
through the area were counted. Some ships have performed several voyages. 57
the
made by a fishing ship. In 25 cases the speed was smaller than 5 kriots, which means that
fishing vessel was during crossing the These 25 crossings were performed
fishing dumping area.
vessels was
by 12 different fishing vessels, In nearly all cases the navigation state of the fishing
different
7, meaning that the ship was busy with fishing. By the fishing activity and the number of
fishing vessels that were active in the dumping areas, it can be concluded that the dumping area
is not avoided by fishing vessels.
Table 0-1 Ships that have crossed the dumping area in 2010
Dumping area
. Rotterdam Rotterdam
IJmuiden
Noh South
Crossings by ships with AlS 720 402 240
29
Crossirigs 57 35
fishing during crossing 25 16
11
Onlyfishng
differentvessels 12 9 7
vessels
observations fishing (speed over
of
ground < 5 knots), each observation 748 394 240
2
means minutes fishing
Ships anchoring 0 0 0
following inddents can happen area:
The in dumping
• ship sinks;
the bottom;
• ship has a contact with
• ship
anchors;
that fishing gear;
• fishing vessels have contact with the bottom by
cargo as
• Loss of container or other deck cargo.
the
The. probabilities of above incidents will be quantified for the three dumping areas, for
proposed route structure, which means that the route-bound traffic will clisappear from the
IJmuiden, because this comes into an area that is cleared of
dumping area near dumping area
will disappear from
shipping. Further it is expected that the non-route-bound activities as fishing
lane of the
the dumping areas near Rotterdam because these areas come into a busy traffic
moved Maas-North TSS.
Probability of sinking
A ship can sink as single incident by overwhelming by the sea, which is called a foundering or
The incident a larger probability than the second.
after a collision by another ship. first has
in an one-way traffic lane is very
Because, the probability that a ship will sink after a collision
that a
unlikely. Therefore, only the incident foundening is used for the estimation of the probability
will sink in the dumping area.
ship
Probability of a container or other deck cargo overboard
MARIN
probability of loss of a container or deck cargo is used in several studies of with
The
cable pipeline. The probability of losing a container is refreshed based
respect to the risk for a or
year at sea, while other
on new data. Some sources estimate that 10000 containers are lost per
probability a
estimates are between 3000 and 4000 containers. For the refreshment of the
