Nulmeting vergunningverlening, toezicht en handhaving door het Openbaar Lichaam Bonaire 
 
Summary 
 
Assignment and investigation 
th
On the 4 of October 2022, the State Secretary of Infrastructure and Water 
Management (IenW) requested the Human Environment and Transport Inspectorate 
(Inspectie Leefomgeving en Transport), hereinafter ILT, to conduct an investigation 
into permits, supervision and enforcement (VTH) on Bonaire, St. Eustatius and 
Saba. The State Secretary also requested recommendations for improving the 
system and introducing ‘checks and balances’. The investigation was conducted in 
coordination with the Minister for Nature and Nitrogen of the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Nature and Food Quality (Ministerie van Landbouw, Natuur en Voedselkwaliteit) 
hereinafter LNV.  
 
th
On the 10 of October 2022, the Island Governor of Bonaire asked if the ILT could 
conduct an assessment of the internal improvement process ongoing within the 
Public Entity Bonaire (OLB) and draw conclusions from it regarding supervision and 
enforcement in respect of the natural environment and the human environment.  
 
This report presents the outcome of both investigations and focuses specifically on 
the execution of the VTH tasks relating to construction, the environment and nature 
on Bonaire. The project team formed by ILT and LNV visited twice Bonaire for the 
purposes of the investigation. In addition, interviews were conducted and 
documents and reports were studied. OLB employees cooperated fully in providing 
information for the investigation and ensured that the project team could interview 
the desired individuals. 
 
Results of the VTH investigation 
The ILT concludes that the execution of VTH tasks relating to construction, the 
environment and nature on Bonaire does not comply with legal requirements and 
local regulations. This conclusion is based on the following observations. 
 
General 
• The Executive Council has adopted the Implementation Programme for 
Supervision and Enforcement (Uitvoeringsprogramma Toezicht en 
Handhaving), however an associated inspection programme is lacking.   
• The Directorate of Spatial Planning and Development (directie Ruimte & 
Ontwikkeling), hereinafter DR&O, is responsible for permit issue among 
other things. The Directorate of Supervision & Enforcement (directie 
Toezicht & Handhaving), hereinafter DR&O, is responsible for supervision 
and enforcement. Within these Directorates, the necessary checks and 
balances such as concrete and approved scheduling, documented work 
processes and peer review are lacking. 
• The VTH process is not transparent. The OLB does not adequately use digital 
systems for verifiable permit issue and verifiable implementation of 
supervision and enforcement. Document registration is incomplete and 
performed in different ways. 
• DR&O and DT&H do not manage execution of the VTH tasks in a targeted 
manner. 
• DR&O and DT&H do not structurally coordinate the work among themselves. 
As a result, an integrated approach to complex cases is lacking. 
 
Permits 
• DR&O does not have an up-to-date list of businesses required to have a 
nuisance permit. 
Pagina 15 van 69
