Nulmeting vergunningverlening, toezicht en handhaving door het Openbaar Lichaam Bonaire 
 
• Legally required advisers, including the Bonaire Nature Management 
Commission (Commissie Natuurbeheer Bonaire), the fire department and 
internal departments, are either not involved in a permit process at all, or 
are not involved in a timely manner. 
• (Preliminary) permits are either not published, or not published in a timely 
manner, so stakeholders are not informed or not informed in time. This has 
implications for their legal position. 
• There are permit issue backlogs. Statutory deadlines are not monitored. 
 
Example 
A shed, roofed outside storage area and factory under construction appear not to 
have construction permits. The construction work was completed after several 
months and OLB then issued a building permit for the shed and roofed outside 
storage area No construction permit was issued for the factory. 
 
Supervision 
• Supervision is not carried out in a planned manner and only on the basis of 
complaints and incidents. 
• DT&H claims that the total available supervision capacity is deployed for 
this. 
 
Example 
A waste processing company commissioned an investigation on its own initiative 
after persistent complaints from local residents about nuisance. Based on the 
results, the company decided to shut down the incinerator. There is no evidence 
that OLB actually inspected this company. 
 
Enforcement 
• The enforcement applied in the case of infringements is not consistent. 
• Enforcement is not seamlessly followed through up to and including the 
collection of penalty payments, resulting in infringements not being 
corrected.  
 
Example 
Two coastal development projects are being realised without all required ecological 
and building permits having been issued. As a result, the appropriate measures to 
protect the coast and coral were not implemented during construction. Enforcement 
action on the part of the OLB is not resulting in measures to reverse the impact of 
the infringements. 
 
Underlying causes 
The OLB faces several bottlenecks that prevent correct execution of VTH. The ILT 
has identified a number of causes in this regard. 
 
Staff and organisation 
• The demands placed on staff have increased, however training and 
coordination when executing the tasks are lagging behind. 
• Vacant positions, including management positions, are difficult to fill and 
remain open for long periods of time. Appointments are regularly not 
renewed after the initial 3-year period. This is detrimental to continuity and 
the development of a sense of responsibility.  
• Multiple improvement programmes run side by side for long periods of time 
with no identified end date. This leads to a lack of clarity about 
responsibilities within the organisational structure. 
 
Pagina 16 van 69
