Nulmeting vergunningverlening, toezicht en handhaving door het Openbaar Lichaam Bonaire 
 
Resources and processes 
• Support systems for VTH and document registration are not adequately 
used. 
• Policies, programmes and project plans are regularly submitted to the 
Executive Council for adoption without them actually being considered or 
adopted by the Executive Council. 
 
Culture and managerial influence 
• The OLB does not provide a safe working environment where employees feel 
supported by the civil servants in leadership positions when they have to 
make decisions that do not automatically qualify for administrative approval.  
• Employees of the OLB are instructed to issue permits. They are also 
subjected to intimidation to ensure that they do not start or pursue 
enforcement actions. 
• The cases that were examined indicate that illegal situations are 
subsequently legalised. This may be acceptable in exceptional cases; on 
Bonaire, however, it is a regular occurrence. 
 
Involvement of the Dutch government 
• The Dutch government exercises administrative control through policy and 
programmes, but actual implementation is not adequately tracked. 
• The date of entry into force of the BES Establishment and Activities Decree 
(Inrichtingen- en Activiteitenbesluit BES), hereinafter IAB BES, has been 
postponed several times. This has led to business owners and the OLB 
adopting a wait-and-see attitude regarding applications for and the issue of 
nuisance permits. 
• The Kingdom Representative has the authority to apply intergovernmental 
supervision (Interbestuurlijk Toezicht), hereinafter IBT, but a policy 
framework for applying IBT is lacking and no supervisors have been 
designated to support this task.  
• The OLB has its hands full with working visits, steering groups and task 
forces with a level of ambition that does not match their implementation 
capacity. This makes normal work less of a priority.  
 
Conclusion 
The OLB’s execution of the VTH tasks is not in order. The process lacks legal 
certainty, which can lead to arbitrariness. The interests that laws relating to 
construction, the environment and nature are intended to protect are either not 
being protected at all, or not being protected adequately. Efforts on the part of the 
OLB and the Dutch government to improve this have not been sufficiently effective. 
Due to this multiplicity of sometimes strongly interdependent causes, a fundamental 
change in the execution of VTH tasks is needed in order to improve the situation. 
 
The OLB does not have the knowledge and experience required to adequately 
execute the VTH tasks. Permits have not been issued for several businesses and 
activities. Legally required advisers are not involved consistently and in a timely 
manner in the permit issue process. Decisions are not published in the proper 
manner and the processes are not transparent. Supervision takes place on an ad 
hoc basis and enforcement does not lead to remediation of the infringement. 
 
Bonaire's size as a small community and the Executive Council's proximity to that 
community make professional and impartial execution of the VTH process more 
difficult. This is compounded by the lack of adequate ‘checks and balances’ within 
the organisation. The Kingdom Representative, in his role as the final ‘check and 
Pagina 17 van 69
