Nulmeting vergunningverlening, toezicht en handhaving door het Openbaar Lichaam Bonaire 
 
balance’ in the VTH process, is limited in his ability to act in accordance with this 
responsibility. He has powers but no supervisors to support the execution of his 
duties. 
 
Recommendations 
The ILT recommends the following action to improve execution of the VTH tasks 
relating to construction, the environment and nature. 
 
Recommendation 1 (Dutch government) 
Rapidly transfer the execution of the entire VTH task package relating to 
construction, the environment and nature to a single existing environment agency in 
the Netherlands in Europe. This ensures retention of knowledge and experience, and 
guarantees continuity, while at the same time distancing the activities from the 
Executive Council. 
• In line with the situation in the Netherlands in Europe, the public entity 
retains its powers and continues to have final responsibility. Actual 
execution of the tasks is assigned to the environment agency.  The public 
entity gives the director of this environment agency a mandate to sign 
permits and enforcement orders. 
• Immediately start to identify and eliminate permit issue backlogs within the 
OLB, under the management and with the support of the environment 
agency. 
• Due to the significant physical distance to Bonaire, special attention is 
needed for the practical aspects of executing the VTH tasks. This can be 
achieved by closely involving the current OLB permit issue officers and 
supervisors in the execution of the tasks under the environment agency's 
control. 
 
Recommendation 2 (OLB) 
Address the identified bottlenecks within the administrative organisation of the OLB 
quickly and in a focused manner, in close cooperation with the environment agency 
referred to in 1. Part of the VTH process will continue to be executed by the OLB 
despite recommendation 1. 
• Organisation structure: Clarify progress in ongoing improvement projects 
through the DR&O/DT&H Improvement Plans Steering Committee and 
complete these projects as soon as possible.  
• Staff and Organisation: Prioritise recruitment for vacancies within the VTH 
process and completion of ongoing projects, including the ‘OLB 
Revitalisation’ project (‘Revitalisering OLB’).   
• Management: Set priorities on an annual basis and link them to a concrete 
schedule of work. Perform the work and monitor progress. 
• Use of ICT: Make an unequivocal choice for support systems. Arrange 
training for the employees and focus management attention on consistent 
use of these systems. 
 
Recommendation 3 (Dutch government and OLB) 
In close coordination with the OLB, ensure up-to-date and adequate laws and 
regulations for construction, the environment and nature.  
• Specifically for construction: Evaluate the current building regulations and 
clarify the validity of old building regulations (OLB and Dutch government). 
Use the BES code to implement the functional requirements of the Buildings 
Decree and anchor this code by means of a Ministerial Decree. 
Pagina 18 van 69
