Summary and conclusions
Romanian migrants: their situation shortly after migration to the
Netherlands
Romanians in the Netherlands
With a very low average per capita income, Romania is one of the poorest countries in the
European Union (eu). Official figures show that youth unemployment, in particular, is very
high, standing at almost 25% in 2013 (Eurostat 2013). The economic picture in Romania is
thus anything but rosy, a key reason why Romanians wishing to migrate look to countries
within the eu where there is more chance of finding work and earning a better income.
Romania has a population of just under 20 million, and in this respect is comparable to the
Netherlands. One major difference compared with the Netherlands today is that Romania
is a true emigration country, with several million Romanians living in other countries. Most
Romanian migrants in recent years have moved to Southern Europe, with more than a mil-
lion living in Italy and over 700,000 in Spain. Other countries with a large Romanian
migrant population are Germany and the United Kingdom. In comparison with these coun-
tries, the number of Romanians living in the Netherlands is very modest. Nonetheless,
Romanians have attracted a good deal of attention in the media and from politicians.
There are few groups about which the Dutch public hold more negative views than Roma-
nians (and Bulgarians: Dagevos & Gijsberts 2013).
In popular parlance, Bulgarians and Romanians are often regarded as virtually the same as
each other, but how true is this? Relatively little is known about the life situation of Roma-
nian migrants who moved to the Netherlands after the expansion of the eu (with the
exception of Engbersen et al. 2011; Korf et al. 2011). This report seeks to change this by
homing in on migrants from Romania who have been in the Netherlands for only a short
time. In 2013, the Netherlands Institute for Social Research | scp published the report ‘New
in the Netherlands” (Nieuw in Nederland), which described the situation of recently migrated
Poles and Bulgarians (Gijsberts & Lubbers 2013). Where possible, we compare the situation
of recently migrated Romanians with that of Bulgarians and Poles in that publication.
We address four main questions in this report: 1) What is the composition of the group of
recently migrated Romanians? 2) What is their socio-economic position in the Nether-
lands? 3) What is there sociocultural position? 4) What are the prospects of this migrant
group remaining in the Netherlands? The answers to these questions are set out below.
Survey of registered Romanians shortly after migration
In order to answer these questions, a survey was conducted among recently migrated
Romanians. For this purpose, a random sample was drawn by Statistics Netherlands (cbs)
from all first-generation Romanian migrants who were entered in the Dutch population
register for the first time between 1 January 2013 and 1 October 2014 and who were aged
between 18 and 65 years. The sample only included municipalities where at least
99 summary and conclusions
