25 Romanian migrants were registered. A total of 26 municipalities were sampled.
The selected Romanian migrants were approached in the autumn of 2014 and interviewed
face-to-face by a Romanian interviewer in the Romanian language. The study thus focuses
exclusively on registered migrants from Romania, who in many cases have been in the
Netherlands for only a very short time.
The study design and the questionnaire used were as far as possible identical to the study
of recently migrated Poles and Bulgarians in 2010 and 2011, thus making comparisons pos-
sible. It should however be borne in mind that the Romanian migrants moved to the Neth-
erlands in a different period and were interviewed at a different time from the Polish and
Bulgarian migrants. Differences between Romanians on the one hand and Poles and Bul-
garians on the other may therefore be due not only to differences of origin but also to
differences between the research periods. One key difference is for example that the study
of Bulgarians took place at a time when work permits were still a requirement. This rule
remained in force until 1 January 2014. By contrast, some of the Romanians in our study
migrated to the Netherlands whilst the work permit requirement was in force, and some
after it had ended. This does make it possible to examine whether there are any differen-
ces between Romanians who arrived in the Netherlands before and after 1 January 2014.
In total, 356 interviews were fully completed. Based on the total number of addresses vis-
ited, the response rate was low, at 25%. In 50% of cases it was found that the envisaged
respondent had since left the Netherlands (therefore forming part of the false non-
response). If these addresses are left out of consideration, the response rate is 51%. That is
comparable with the response rates in the study of recently migrated Poles and Bulgarians.
How many Romanians are there in the Netherlands?
Like Bulgarians, Romanians have had the right to settle freely in the eu since the country’s
accession on 1 January 2007. However, the Netherlands imposed a condition requiring
these migrants to hold a work permit in order to be able to work in the Netherlands.
As stated earlier, this condition remained in force until 1 January 2014. The idea was that
the work permit requirement would prevent a flood of migrants. Although the number of
Romanians in the Netherlands is still relatively small compared with other eu Member
States, there has been a clear increase since 2007.
Following its accession to the eu, migration to the Netherlands from Romania has risen
steadily from a few hundred per year in the years prior to 2007 to around 5,000 per year in
2014 – comparable with the volume of immigrants from Bulgaria. The immigration of
Romanians increased after 1 January 2014, while it stayed on the same level among Bulgar-
ians. It is worth noting that five times as many Polish immigrants come to the Netherlands
each year than Romanians. Migration from Poland is higher on an annualised basis than
that of the four biggest non-Western migrant groups in the Netherlands (Turks, Moroc-
cans, Surinamese and Antilleans) combined.
By no means all Romanians who migrate to the Netherlands remain; the migration balance
is relatively low. Notably, Romanian emigration from the Netherlands has continued to
increase, including after 1 January 2014, while among Bulgarians it is falling. In the earlier
100 summary and conclusions
