report on Bulgarians and Poles we saw that more Bulgarians appear to be settling in the
Netherlands.
It is difficult to state precisely how many Romanians are living in the Netherlands, on the
one hand because there is a great deal of inward and outward movement and the size and
composition of the group is therefore constantly changing, and on the other because by no
means everyone is entered in the Dutch population register. Migrants who intend to
remain for less than four months (e.g. seasonal workers) are not required to register, and
not everyone who stays longer than that does so. cbs (2015) recently calculated that
roughly half of all Romanian employees in the Netherlands are entered in the population
register. If we consider only those who are entered in the population register, there were
21,000 registered Romanians living in the Netherlands on 1 January 2015. It is thus a rela-
tively small group; on the same date, there were almost 138,000 registered Poles.
Characteristics of Romanians who migrate to the Netherlands
The majority of recent migrants from Romania in our study are labour migrants; one in five
moved are study migrants, and roughly the same proportion are family migrants. Roma-
nian labour migrants are slightly more often men than women; family migrants are more
often women, while both sexes are equally represented among study migrants. Some 80%
of all migrants from Romania are aged under 35. The majority already knew people in the
Netherlands before migrating. This matches findings in the migration literature, which
reports that people often migrate to countries where they already know people (chain
migration).
The majority of recently registered migrants in the Netherlands are ethnic Romanian;
a small percentage (6%) originate from the Hungarian minority. In our study we encoun-
tered virtually no Romanian Roma; it is likely that they are not often entered in the popula-
tion register. Most of the Romanian migrants (nearly a third: 29%) come from Bucharest.
Other regions from which relatively large numbers of Romanians originate are Bacau
(12%), Constanta (8%), Galati (5%) and Cluj (6%). Only a small proportion (12%) have chil-
dren living with them in the Netherlands; 9% of Romanian migrants say their children live
in Romania. The percentage of Romanians living in the Netherlands with a family is thus
relatively small.
Recently migrated Romanians have a high education level
The Romanians who have recently migrated to the Netherlands are a very highly qualified
group. Engbersen et al. (2011) also observed this in their study of Romanians some years
ago. No fewer than 55% of non-school-age Romanians have a university qualification or
equivalent, and 26% have a senior secondary education qualification. One in five have a
low education level (no higher than junior secondary level). They are thus better educated
than the Polish group – themselves well educated – who are much more often found in the
middle category. As with the Polish migrants in the Netherlands, women in the Romanian
group are better educated than the men.
101 summary and conclusions
