Romanians who have migrated to the Netherlands are notably better educated than the
population in Romania. In contrast to what we found for the Bulgarians, therefore
– namely that a selection of low-educated Bulgarians migrate to the Netherlands – among
Romanians it is a selection of highly educated people who move to the Netherlands. More-
over, one in five recent Romanian migrants are study migrants, studying full-time in the
Dutch higher education system (a comparable proportion to the share of students among
Bulgarian migrants). Although comparison with other countries is difficult owing to a lack
of systematic data collection, the picture of Romanian migrants as often highly educated
also appears to hold for other European countries (Andren & Roman 2014).
Housing situation in the Netherlands
Romanian migrants are dispersed throughout the Netherlands, but primarily live in the
major cities, with the biggest number living in Amsterdam. The majority live in an apart-
ment or house. Just over 10% of the Romanians in our live in a hostel, bed-and-breakfast
or holiday park. Almost half of the Romanians share their home with non-family members,
especially those living in hostels and holiday parks. Just under one in five say they live
alone, and just over a quarter share their home with relatives. Not surprisingly, students
and labour migrants more often share their home with non-family members, while family
migrants more often share their home with family members (and in most cases with no
one else). The majority of Romanian migrants have moved into a home owned by a private
landlord; in this study we found only a very small proportion who rent a home via their
employer or an employment agency.
Reports appear in the Dutch media regularly about the poor housing situation of Roma-
nian migrants. The interviewers also sometimes reported very simple accommodation; this
was often hostels or holiday parks, or homes with several people living at one address.
However, this picture is almost absent from the perceptions of the respondents. Only 4%
are explicitly dissatisfied with their housing situation; 11% are neither satisfied not dissatis-
fied; and a large majority say they are satisfied or very satisfied. It may be that most of
them are comparing their housing situation primarily with their possible worse housing sit-
uation before migration. The housing situation of Romanian migrants who are not entered
in the population register because they come to the Netherlands for temporary work could
well be worse.
Romanians speak good English
Not many Romanians have a good command of the Dutch language, and this applies espe-
cially for men. This is not surprising, since at the time of the study the migrants had spent
an average of only a year in the Netherlands. Yet they make little effort to learn Dutch.
Moreover, their command of Dutch is worse than among Poles and Bulgarians who were
surveyed some years ago when they too had only recently arrived in the Netherlands. It is
also striking that the large group of study migrants and highly educated Romanians do not
have an appreciably better command of Dutch than their lower-educated counterparts. It
may be that their good command of English – something which applies not only for the
102 summary and conclusions
