students, but also for many low-educated Romanian migrants – removes the incentive to
invest in learning Dutch. It may be that a command of English is sufficient for employers to
be able to communicate with Romanian employees.
Majority have a good position on the Dutch labour market
The picture presented by the Romanian migrants we studied is not that of the stereotypical
labourer in the agricultural and horticultural sector. A substantial proportion of Rumanian
migrants are employed in the ict sector or for example carrying out research at Dutch uni-
versities. Naturally, there are also some registered Romanian migrants working at the bot-
tom end of the labour market, but this group is much smaller than among Poles and Bul-
garians, the majority of whom were found to be working in the production, agriculture/
horticulture, construction or cleaning sectors. It is also found that only a small proportion
are unemployed. Romanian men in the Netherlands have paid work more often than
women.
Despite the good labour market position, especially of highly educated Romanians, as with
other migrant groups we see that the occupational status of the jobs that migrants held in
Romania was higher on average than that of their jobs in the Netherlands. The higher
income they receive compensates for this decline in occupational status. A majority of
Romanians work full time, often for more than 40 hours per week. Many of them work in
temporary jobs and almost a third of recent Romanian migrants regularly work in the eve-
nings or at weekends. A small proportion are in jobs involving hazardous or physically
strenuous work.
Little difference between Romanians who migrated before and after 1 January 2014
The differences between Romanians who migrated to the Netherlands before 1 January
2014 (when a work permit was still required) and those who came after that date are small.
One of the more characteristic differences is that migrants who came to the Netherlands
before 1 January 2014 are more often self-employed. This is in line with the fact that they
did not require a work permit. The proportion of self-employed people who migrated to
the Netherlands before 1 January 2014 (11%) is comparable with the proportion of self-
employed Bulgarians in the period 2010/2011 (13%).
Orientation towards the Netherlands and Romania
Romanian migrants are in regular contact with Dutch natives. The majority (57%) report
that they have daily contact, in many cases probably via their work. There is also a group
(around 20%) who have no contact with Dutch natives. A similar percentage report that
they never or rarely have contact with members of their own ethnic group; that is connect-
ed to the small size of the Romanian group in the Netherlands.
Romanians are not (yet) deeply embedded in Dutch associational life and show relatively
little interest in politics either in the Netherlands or in Romania. One in three (still) have a
house in Romania and almost half send money there. Low-educated Romanians, in partic-
ular, stand out in this regard: three-quarters of them send money to Romania.
103 summary and conclusions
