Given the high average education level, the large group of students and their good com-
mand of English, we expect the Romanian group in the Netherlands to maintain frequent
contacts with other migrant groups and to make more frequent use of English-language
media. It may be that the large group of students in the Romanian migrant group, but also
the highly skilled knowledge workers, do not so much shift their attention from Romania
to the Netherlands, but rather tend to have an international orientation.
Religion and moral views
Virtually all Romanian migrants see themselves as members of a church, mostly Eastern
Orthodox (80%); a small group say they are Roman Catholic (10%). Church attendance is
low, however; that was also the case before their migration, but has fallen even further
since. Despite this, half of recent Romanian migrants to the Netherlands regard themselves
as fairly to very religious. The proportion is even higher among low-educated Romanians.
Opinions on divorce and homosexuality can be described as progressive.
Experiences in the Netherlands
The majority of recent Romanian migrants are satisfied with their lives in the Netherlands.
They are particularly satisfied with their earnings and regard their life situation as substan-
tially better than when they lived in Romania. Half say they feel at home in the Nether-
lands, while a slightly smaller proportion say they sometimes do and sometimes do not
feel at home. A minority of 16% do not feel at home in the Netherlands.
They are also predominantly satisfied with the way they have been received in the Nether-
lands: a large majority feel that the Netherlands is a hospitable country for Romanians. We
know from earlier research that the perceptions of the Dutch public about Romanians (and
Bulgarians) are not positive, and the sense of satisfaction is consequently not universal.
One in five Romanian migrants feel that their own group is often subject to discrimination
in the Netherlands, and 44% think this is sometimes the case. The percentage who have
themselves experienced discrimination in the short time they have been in the Netherlands
is 8%.
If we look at the remaining group, it is notable that family migrants take the most positive
view of their lives in the Netherlands. The Romanian study migrants also stand out in a
positive sense. They often already feel at home, are satisfied with their lives in the Nether-
lands and less often believe that they themselves or their ethnic group are subject to dis-
crimination.
Minority of Romanians see their future in the Netherlands
Roughly a third of the entire group think they will continue to live in the Netherlands. If we
compare this with migrants from Poland and Bulgaria, we find that the Romanian group
occupy a middle position in this regard. Roughly the same length of time after their migra-
tion, just under half of Poles thought they would remain in the Netherlands, compared
with a quarter of the Bulgarian group. There are few differences within the Romanian
group as regards their intention to remain; by contrast, among Bulgarian migrants we
104 summary and conclusions
