found that those with a low education level more often planned to stay in the Netherlands.
Despite their relatively high satisfaction with life in the Netherlands, settlement patterns
appear to be relatively weak among Romanians. One indication for this is the low share of
Romanians with a family in the Netherlands; only 12% have children in their household.
This figure is much higher among recent migrants from Poland and Bulgaria. Emigration
from the Netherlands is also relatively common among Romanians: 50% of our sample
were found to have left the Netherlands again.
Conclusion: registered Romanian migrants are doing well in the Netherlands
Findings from earlier research (Korf et al. 2011) suggest that Romanian migrants in the
Netherlands are divided into a highly educated group who mainly live in the major cities
and work at ict companies or universities, and a group of low-educated seasonal workers
who generally live in rural areas (often in the south of the country) and are employed in the
construction, industrial or agriculture/horticulture sectors. To what extent is this picture
reflected in our own survey data?
Although we also find both groups in the survey data, our conclusion is that recent (regis-
tered) Romanian migrants are generally doing well in the Netherlands. The group at the
top – very well educated, studying or working in senior or academic jobs – form a clear
numerical majority. Over half the non-school-age recent migrants from Romania have a
higher education/university qualification, and to these can be added the group of study
migrants who are currently in Dutch higher education.
The share of highly educated Romanians is thus much larger than in the Bulgarian or Polish
groups. The Bulgarian group also contains a substantial number of study migrants, but the
rest of this group are generally low-educated and work at the lower end of the labour mar-
ket. We would describe their position as relatively vulnerable. Recent Polish migrants to
the Netherlands are substantially better educated than their Bulgarian counterparts, but
predominantly to intermediate level. They are much less likely than registered Romanians
to be working in high-level occupations, so that the average occupational status of Polish
migrants is substantially lower.
One explanation as to why Bulgarians who migrate to the Netherlands are mainly low-
educated may lie in the pull effect from the Turkish community in the Netherlands; this
also plays a role in Germany, for example. Turkish Bulgarians are often employed by
Turkish-origin employers in the Netherlands in jobs at the bottom end of the labour
market.
Highly educated recent Romanian migrants to the Netherlands recently who took part in
our study match the profile of high-skilled ‘knowledge migrants’: they speak excellent Eng-
lish and came to the Netherlands to work in high-status jobs for international companies,
or to study or work at Dutch universities.
People with a lower education level make up a substantially smaller proportion of the reg-
istered Romanian migrants in our study, with one in five having a maximum of an inter-
mediate qualification and a quarter working in lower-status jobs in sectors such as
105 summary and conclusions
