construction or agriculture/horticulture or in the production sector. These groups generally
appear to stay in the Netherlands for a short period – for seasonal labour – perhaps
explaining why they not crop up often in our survey: half our sample were found to have
already left the Netherlands again. In reality, however, this more vulnerable group could be
larger than our estimate suggests, for example because their employers or landlords
refused to take part in the survey. If that were the case, however, it begs the question of
why we did not encounter this phenomenon among the Polish and Bulgarian migrants in
the earlier study. Our non-response analyses also provide no indication that our study pop-
ulation was a selective group of registered Romanians.
It is not unlikely that the picture for unregistered Romanian migrants is less positive. None-
theless, the study by Engbersen et al. (2011) – which surveyed both registered and unregis-
tered Romanians – also revealed a strikingly high education level. Our study focused only
on Romanians who were entered in the Dutch population register who, according to recent
calculations by Statistics Netherlands (cbs), account for roughly half of employees from
Romania. The proportion who are not registered as employees and not entered in the pop-
ulation register is not known. More research is needed to investigate differences in the life
situation of registered and unregistered migrants from Central and Eastern Europe.
Other research suggests that the problems may be more pressing for unregistered
migrants (see e.g. Korf et al. 2011), but little research has thus far been carried out on this
group. Problems have been signalled particularly in the Roma group. Their life situation in
the Netherlands is very poor and they are frequently involved in criminal behaviour, some-
times in the form of roving gangs. These Roma originate from a variety of countries (e.g.
Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary). There are also signs that Romanians living in large Dutch cit-
ies face problems with housing and poverty (see e.g. Booi et al. 2014). The experiences of
the Romanian interviewers in this study also suggest that there are problems with housing.
A study published last year by De Boom et al. (2014) found that criminality among Romani-
ans is mainly concentrated among unregistered migrants. This is in all probability cross-
border criminality, in what has also been termed ‘mobile banditism’ (Siegel 2013).
We consistently compared low-educated and highly educated Romanians on all the
aspects investigated in this study. We recap the findings here. In terms of housing situa-
tion, well-educated Romanians are rather more often satisfied than their low-educated
counterparts, though a majority of the latter group are also satisfied. There are no differ-
ences by education level in command of the Dutch language, though highly educated
Romanians have a better command of English and relatively more often make an effort to
learn Dutch. On the labour market, highly educated Romanians are slightly more often in
work (and logically have a higher occupational status and concomitant greater satisfaction
with their income), but here again the difference is not great. Low-educated Romanians do
less often have permanent employment contracts and more often work irregular and lon-
ger hours. Low-educated Romanians are more frequently self-employed.
106 summary and conclusions
