There is no appreciable variation by education level in the orientation towards the Nether-
lands (in terms of contacts, media use and political interest), though low-educated Roma-
nians do more often have contact with other Romanians and also more often send money
to Romania. There is no difference by education level in satisfaction with life in the Nether-
lands, though the low-educated group feel more at home in the Netherlands and more
often think their situation has improved since migrating.
The differences in terms of perceived discrimination are not significant, and there is also no
difference between low and highly educated Romanians as regards the intention to remain
in the Netherlands. In the Bulgarian group we found that the very low-educated group (no
more than primary education) much more often expressed a desire to remain in the Neth-
erlands, but that picture is not repeated among the Romanians. All in all, while there are
differences between registered Romanians in the Netherlands with a low or high education
level, they are relatively small. Registered Romanian migrants are therefore not a divided
group.
The picture that emerges from this study of (registered) recent migrants from Romania in
the Netherlands is thus that of a group who are on average well educated; are mainly in the
Netherlands to work or study; are often single but sometimes living with a partner; do not
often live with children; mostly envisage a temporary stay and are not very focused on set-
tling in the Netherlands. The high proportion of well-educated Romanian migrants have an
international orientation and a good command of the English language, which they often
speak very well.
This conclusion goes against the dominant image of Romanians in the Netherlands.
A study carried out a few years ago showed how negative the perceptions are (Dagevos &
Gijsberts 2013). There are few migrant groups about which public opinion in the Nether-
lands is so negative as about Romanians (and Bulgarians). Not only is there a fear that
Romanians (and Bulgarians) will take away jobs from Dutch natives, but they are also fre-
quently associated with criminality. Those perceptions are driven partly by media reports
about roving gangs of Romanians, problems with groups of Roma, housing overcrowding,
nuisance in the major cities and the very poor conditions in which Romanian seasonal
workers live on Dutch farms. The fact that highly educated, successful Romanian migrants
have also come to the Netherlands in recent years is something that few Dutch people are
aware of.
One final important conclusion is that there are more differences than correspondences
between registered Romanian migrants and migrants from Bulgaria. The fact that they are
so often mentioned in the same breath is therefore not entirely justified. The Netherlands
Scientific Council for Government Policy (wrr) argued last year that policy attention is nee-
ded for Bulgarians and Romanians (Kremer & Schrijvers 2014). If we look only at recently
migrated Romanians who register in the Netherlands, however, we find no major prob-
lems. Bulgarian migrants in the Netherlands are in a vulnerable position socioeconomically,
but the situation of Romanians who have registered in the Netherlands is good.
107 summary and conclusions
