EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Introduction Accountability for the regulation of civil aviation There are also some sections which cover both 
rests with the government. Responsibilities for maritime and aviation where the skills required 
As part of a wider review of the legislative regulation sit with the government and are, in the are not domain specific (e.g. environment, 
framework and governmental arrangements for most part, delegated to separate organisations. analysis).
the regulation of civil aviation in The Netherlands, These organisations may either be an Agency   The key message here is that in all three of the 
it was agreed that a benchmarking exercise be of, or an independent body sponsored by the benchmarked States, whilst the arrangements 
undertaken to review the organisational structure, responsible government department (e.g., may differ, the regulation of civil aviation is 
the distribution of roles and responsibilities between Department for Transport). undertaken by specialist staff with aviation 
the different key-players in the aviation systems to specific skills, knowledge and expertise.
ensure compliance with, and the implementation 2.  Two of the three States, Ireland and the United 
of the ICAO, and where applicable, the EU-EASA Kingdom (UK), have established specialist 4.  All of the three benchmarked States (Ireland 
regulatory frameworks. Three States were selected, aviation regulatory bodies: the Irish Aviation and the UK) have adopted the principle of 
these being The Republic of Ireland, the Kingdom of Authority (IAA) and the UK Civil Aviation “the user pays” in order to fund their Aviation 
Sweden and the United Kingdom. These States were Authority (CAA) respectively. These Authorities Authorities. Fees are charged for activities such 
asked to consider a pre-prepared questionnaire are sponsored by and are responsible to the as certification, licensing and approvals etc. The 
and were visited by representatives of the review responsible government department and deal government provides funding only for certain, 
team. Detailed reports have been written describing exclusively with the regulation of civil aviation. specific individual tasks (e.g., projects). In the 
the regulatory frameworks for civil aviation for each UK, the government delegated the regulation 
of these three States, and these are attached to 3.  In Sweden, the Swedish Transport Agency, which of aviation security to the CAA in order to fund 
this summary. This Executive Summary provides an is responsible to the Ministry of Rural Affairs and the activity. Indeed, the aviation sector is unique 
overview of the key points arising from the review of Infrastructure, covers the regulation of all modes in the UK in having an independent security 
each of these States. of transport (road, rail, maritime and aviation). regulator: the government’s Department for 
The Agency has a department that is dedicated Transport has responsibility for the regulation of 
Findings to maritime and aviation activities. Within this security matters for all other transport modes.
department there are specialist sections for  
1.  In all three States, there is a clear distinction maritime and aviation specific matters (e.g. 
1
between regulation and service provision . flight training, air traffic and aerodromes etc.). 
1
  In the Republic of Ireland, this separation between regulation and service provision is currently being implemented by the Air Navigation Transport Act 2022 which enters into effect on 31st March 2023.
3
