REGULATION OF AVIATION IN THE REPUBLIC OF IRELAND
Introduction The Minister for Transport has powers to make Consultants are contracted whenever necessary 
regulations (secondary legislation) to take account to provide advice, as well as other services such 
Regulation of the aviation sector in the Republic of of the ICAO Annexes (under the Air Navigation and as periodical reviews of safety performance (this is 
Ireland (Eire) is covered mainly by the Department Transport Acts), and also has the power to make covered in more detail later in this report). 
of Transport, and the Irish Aviation Authority (IAA). regulations to support or give effect to EU aviation 
There are some exceptions to this however, these legislation. The DoT is currently reviewing its practice in this 
relate mainly to matters involving the effects of area and undertaking further analysis of best 
aviation on the environment and are explained later The Minister has two separate, distinct departments practice by reviewing oversight of aviation safety 
in this report. reporting to him: one covering transport and regulation in other jurisdictions and the oversight 
the other covering environment, climate and of safety regulation in other sectors in Ireland. A 
Eire is a Member State of the European Union communications. procurement process is scheduled to commence 
and therefore, as well as being subject to the early in 2023 to seek and appoint consultants to 
international aviation standards and recommended The Department of Transport has a staff of 40 undertake further work to support this review.
practices (SARPs) of the International Civil Aviation dedicated to aviation. These staff members are 
Organisation (ICAO), Eire must also comply with spread across four divisions, namely: Safety and The Department of Transport does not routinely look 
the applicable aviation regulations of the European Security, Airports, Air Services, and Air Navigation. at multi-modal correlation, each transport mode 
Parliament and Commission. Members of staff are largely “administrators” in that being managed separately as a specific domain.
they are not technical experts or specialists in any 
In matters relating to aviation, jurisdiction is particular field of aviation. The exception to this The Department is responsible for the country’s 
restricted to Eire’s territorial limits. is the Air Accident Investigation Unit (AAIU) which National Aviation Policy. This policy was published in 
whilst part of the DoT, functions independently. 2015 and will be reviewed in 2023.
The Department of Transport (DoT). Consequently, the Department relies upon technical 
advice provided from other sources. These external Airspace design is treated as a matter of state 
Accountability for the regulation of aviation in Eire sources comprise the Irish Aviation Authority, and policy, and the Department chairs an Airspace 
rests with the government’s Minister for Transport consultants. The Department recognises the IAA’s Design Committee, which meets as required.
and Environment. international engagement and oversight experience 
and the value this brings to informing policy. 
5
