On matters relating to aviation security, the The IAA is independent from, but reports to the DoT. Act 2022 the IAA will also set fees for its regulatory 
Irish Aviation Authority (IAA) is designated as The Board of the IAA is appointed by the Minister. activities in the field of security.
the competent authority, whilst the Department 
of Transport retains responsibility for policy, The IAA is designated as the competent authority The IAA’s fees have been unchanged since 2015 but 
coordinating activities with the police service, and for civil aviation in Ireland in accordance with the will be reviewed annually from 2023. Proposals to 
Ministry for Justice etc., and chairing the National EASA Basic Regulation (regulation (EU) 2018/1139). change the fees are promulgated for consultation 
Aviation Security Committee (NASC). by industry and any other stakeholders.
The new schedule 2 to the Irish Aviation Authority 
The Department also has responsibility for Act 1993 (as inserted by the Air Navigation and The IAA currently has 184 members of staff and is 
negotiating international agreements on matters Transport Act 2022) lists the European Regulations recruiting a further 7 for 2023.  The organisation of 
relating to aviation. under which the IAA is designated competent the IAA is shown in Figure 1.
authority (35 in total).
Irish Aviation Authority (IAA) The IAA has taken a position not to use Qualified 
The IAA currently acts both as a regulator and as a Entities as provided by Annex VI of Regulation (EU) 
The Irish Aviation Authority Act 1993 established the service provider in respect of air navigation services. 2018/1139 of THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND of THE 
Irish Aviation Authority (IAA). The IAA’s functions are  COUNCIL of 4 July 2018 on the basis that it does not 
set out in Section 14 of the 1993 Act, including giving The IAA regulates the meteorological services, which see that there would be any material saving in time 
effect to the majority of ICAO Annexes (except for 3, are provided by the company Met Éireann, Ireland’s or expenditure. The Authority does not routinely 
9, 12, 13, and parts of 16 – see “Responsibilities under national meteorological service. engage contractors, but has done so in cases 
ICAO” below). where highly specialised subjects are involved, such 
In January 2013, secondary legislation came into as fatigue risk management in SAR operations for 
The IAA has the power to make orders (secondary effect allocating duties to the IAA relating to matters example.
legislation) for the purpose of giving effect to the of aviation security.
relevant ICAO Annexes. Provisions in many IAA As an organisation, the Authority is launching a 
orders provide for the making of directions to The IAA is funded solely by fees levied upon the new Brand in 2023 to coincide with the introduction 
support safety. This can be done with immediate industry that it regulates: e.g. fees for the issue and of the Air Navigation Transport Act 2022, and has 
effect. maintenance of approvals, licences, etc. These fees recently updated its IT, HR and Finance departments 
are set by the IAA for safety regulatory activities and and systems.
by the Department for matters relating to security. 
However, under the new Air Navigation Transport 
6
