Department of Housing, Local Government and 16. Annex 17 - Security and eliminate the conflict of interest inherent in the 
Heritage 17.  Annex 18 - The Safe Transport of Dangerous IAA’s current dual mandate, bringing Ireland into 
1.  Annex 3 Meteorological Service Information for Goods by Air line with international best practice, and ultimately 
International Air Navigation – Met Eireann 18. Annex 19 - Safety Management enhancing Ireland’s regulatory environment in the 
2.  Annex 16 Noise – Fingal County Council civil aviation sector. 
(Competent Authority Dublin Airport) Institutional Changes - Air Navigation 
 Noise outside Dublin Airport area - relevant local  Transport Act 2022 With regard to the oversight of the IAA by the DoT, 
county council the Act strengthens the governance and assurance 
The Air Navigation Transport Act 2022 was signed mechanisms through provisions which include: 
Irish Aviation Authority – set out in Schedule to 1993 into law by the President of Ireland on 7th December 1.  The Act provides that the IAA must submit 
Act 2022, and comes into effect on 31st March 2023. The statements of strategy and business plans to the 
3. Annex 1 - Personnel Licensing Act provides for significant institutional changes Minister (Section 65). 
4. Annex 2 - Rules of the Air to how aviation is regulated in Ireland. Specifically, 2.  The financial accounts are to be audited every 
5. Annex 4 - Aeronautical Charts it provides for the separation of the Irish Aviation year by Ireland’s Comptroller and Auditor 
6.  Annex 5 - Units of Measurement to be used in Authority (IAA), with the safety regulation side of the General (Section 66).
Ground and Air Operations IAA to be merged with the Commission for Aviation 3.  The IAA must also provide an Annual Safety 
7. Annex 6 - Operation of Aircraft Regulation (CAR) to create a standalone aviation Performance Statement and an Annual 
8.  Annex 7 - Aircraft Nationality and Registration regulator, whilst the air navigation side of the IAA Environmental Performance Report.
Marks will become a separate commercial agency, to be 
9. Annex 8 - Airworthiness of Aircraft known as the Irish Air Navigation Service (IANS) or The Act also outlines the Minister’s role in terms of 
10.  Annex 10 - Aeronautical Telecommunications AirNav Ireland. Separation of the ANSP activities from appointments of directors/board members to the 
11. Annex 11 - Air Traffic Services the IAA was first considered in 2013, and the work to boards of both the IAA and AirNav Ireland.
12.  Annex 12 - Search and Rescue (limited to rescue enact this was launched in 2015. 
co-ordination centres and rescue sub-centres) In addition to the Act, the IAA is, and AirNav Ireland 
13.  Annex 14 - Aerodromes The Act also amends the regulation of airport will be subject to the provisions of the Code of 
14.  Annex 15 - Aeronautical Information Services charges in Ireland. It will thus establish a single Practice for the Governance of State Bodies in 
15.  Annex 16 - Environmental Protection (other than national aviation regulator responsible for Ireland. This Code is based on the underlying 
environmental protection which falls within economic, safety, security and consumer protection principles of good governance: accountability, 
Volume IV, Carbon Offsetting and Reduction regulation, with a separate state regulated transparency, probity and a focus on the 
Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA) commercial air navigation service provider (IANS), sustainable success of the organisation over the 
8
