longer term, and it aims to ensure that commercial The Framework will apply to each of the 22 Safety
and non-commercial State bodies meet the highest companies in commercial semi-State sector 
standards of corporate governance. (therefore, currently, including the IAA) and provides 1.  Section 32 of the 1993 Act provides for an 
them with a means to demonstrate how they are independent Ministerial oversight function of the 
The Code requires that State bodies submit various meeting their obligations under the Climate Action IAA, including a statutory requirement on the 
types of information to the Minister on an ongoing and Low Carbon Development Acts 2015 to 2021. Minister to carry out an audit on the technical 
and annual basis.  This includes annual rolling These Acts place an obligation on public bodies, and safety functions of the IAA every three years. 
business plans, mid-year reviews, information on including commercial semi-State companies, This audit activity is undertaken by consultants 
compliance with other legislative requirements. to carry out their functions in a manner that is contracted via a tendering process.
consistent with national climate action ambitions. 2.  The Department chairs a State Safety 
Further, a new framework for the commercial semi- Programme Committee which meets quarterly. 
State sector to address climate action objectives Finally, the Act will also enable the IAA to: The IAA and AAIU are members of this 
has been approved by Government.  The Climate 1.  set fees for its security regulation and oversight committee.
Action Framework for the commercial semi-State activities, and 3.  Safety occurrences and safety data are 
sector  aims to help the commercial semi-State 2.  issue fixed penalty notices in its enforcement reviewed and overseen by the IAA.
sector play a lead role in Ireland’s transition to a role.
carbon neutral economy and society. It comprises a Security
series of five commitments: Corporate governance and assurance 
1.  Commitment 1: Governance of Climate Action mechanisms 4.  The Department produces the National Aviation 
Objectives Security Programme (NASP) which is reviewed 
2.  Commitment 2: Emissions Measurement & In addition to the audits and inspections undertaken and updated annually. The programme is 
Reduction Target by the ICAO and the EASA of the aviation regulatory approved by the minister, and administered by 
3.  Commitment 3: Measuring and Valuing arrangements in Eire, the following monitoring and the IAA.
Emissions in Investment Appraisals reporting mechanisms are currently in place (but 5.  The Department chairs a National Aviation 
4.  Commitment 4: Circular Economy and Green refer also to the section on institutional changes Security Committee (NASC) to review security 
Procurement above). performance. The IAA and industry stakeholders 
5.  Commitment 5: Climate Related Disclosures in are represented on this committee.
Financial Reporting
9
