It is notable that recent work has been 4.  National Civil Aviation Development Forum Environmental matters
3
undertaken to introduce an integrated safety (NCADF) – chaired by DoT.
and security risk assessment process with regard DoT officials advise on aviation policy and ensure 
to the subject of the carriage of dangerous There are a number of MOUs in place to cover the that Ireland’s position in relation to aviation related 
goods. This is based upon an initiative initially regulation and oversight of security. environmental matters is effectively represented at 
launched in the Netherlands. national, EU and International Level. 
6.  The IAA submits an annual report, via the Other liaison groups have been established, which 
Department, to the European Commission. include: In relation to ICAO Annex 16, the IAA retains 
1.  IRCG Liaison Group (IAA/DoT), with a focus on the responsibility for Annex 16 Vol 1 (Aircraft Noise), 
Environment regulation of coast guard and SAR activities at a Volume II (Aircraft Engine Emissions) and Vol III 
national level. (Aeroplane CO2 Emissions). The IAA currently checks 
1.  Environmental performance is monitored by the 2.  The National Airspace Policy body (NAPB) for the compliance with these volumes of the Annex for 
Environmental Protection Agency. development of airspace management - (DoT/ aircraft coming onto the Irish aircraft register, and 
Defence/Air Corps/IAA), and  also issue noise certificates to aircraft confirming 
DoT engagement with the IAA and industry 3.  NAPB which oversees (at a high level) the compliance with Vol I.
coordination and implementation of the flexible 
Structures are in place for the systematic use of airspace (FUA) in Ireland. DoT retains legal responsibility for Annex 16 Vol IV - 
engagement between the DoT, the IAA and industry CORISA and is responsible for policy in this area. It 
as per relevant obligations under international In addition to this, StaCMAN (the Standing Civil- also acts as the focal point for Ireland in relation to 
aviation law, including: Military Air Navigation Committee) meets on a ICAO and reports via the CORSIA Central Registry 
1.  National Civil Aviation Security Committee regular basis to provide expert advice, develop with support from the Environmental Protection 
(NCASC), technical procedures and implement decisions of Agency (EPA). Within the EU, CORSIA is administered 
2.  National Air Transport Facilitation Committee the NAPB. through the Emissions Trading System (ETS). 
(FAL),  
3.  State Safety Programme Coordination The ETS is the responsibility of the Department of 
Committee (meets quarterly), the Environment, Climate and Communications 
(D/ECC). DoT is regularly consulted by D/ECC in 
3
  NCADF was established under the National Aviation Policy to enhance arrangements for consulting with industry on the development of national policy and on influencing the development of EU and 
international policy affecting aviation in Ireland.
10
