REGULATION OF AVIATION IN THE KINGDOM OF SWEDEN
Introduction being covered in another, separate department. there being no experience that there are any 
The STA works in total with four transport modes, conflicts of interest. Nevertheless, this question does 
Regulation of the aviation sector in the Kingdom which are aviation, maritime, rail and road. pop up from time to time in different sectors of 
of Sweden is mainly covered by the Civil Aviation government. 
and Maritime Department of the Swedish Transport The mission of the STA is:
Agency (STA). The STA is a separate, independent 1.  To develop an accessible transport system 
organisation responsible to the Ministry of Rural that takes safety, environment and health into 
Affairs and Infrastructure. The Ministry of Rural Affairs consideration;
and Infrastructure is the successor of the Ministry of 2.  To formulate regulations and monitor that they 
Infrastructure after the Swedish election of 2022 and are being complied with;
the following coalition negotiations. 3.  To collect certain taxes and charges.
Sweden is a Member State of the European Union The STA develops and works with five tools for the 
(EU) and therefore, as well as being subject to the four aforementioned transport modes. They:
international aviation standers and recommended 1.  Formulate regulations (in contrast to the 
practices (SARPs) of the International Civil Aviation Kingdom of the Netherlands);
Organisation (ICA), Sweden has also to comply with 2. Examine and grant permits;
the applicable aviation regulations of the European 3. Conduct supervision;
Parliament (EP) and the Commission (EC). 4. Keep and monitor accident statistics;
5. Maintain registers.
The Swedish Transport Agency
Before 2009 regulation was separated from 
The Swedish Transport Agency (STA) was oversight (and permits), but it was less efficient with 
established in 2009 and has approximately 2000 regard to costs and communication. Consequently, 
employees. The STA comprises 10 departments – it was decided to bring together regulation, 
see Figure 1. Civil Aviation and Maritime are covered oversight and permits (approvals) under the same 
by one of those departments, with Road and Rail organisation. This has proven to be effective with 
12
