Aviation Policy remaining 30-20% is covered by the MoF from the Safety
general tax incomes and that part is meant to pay 
Aviation policy is developed within the STA by for the work to develop regulations, attend EU/EASA, The Civil Aviation and Maritime Department has 
the Civil Aviation and Maritime Department and ICAO workshops, Panels etc. three safety management systems which they use 
approved by the Ministry. Different sections within to in order to maintain and improve safety of the 
the department are responsible for policy creation. The STA finances could be split into two sections: aviation sector. These are:
1.  Oversight, licensing and keeping the registers; 1. A State Safety Programme;
Overview of the industry in general 2. Regulation. 2. A Flight Safety Plan, including a risk portfolio;
3.  Safety reports, with events that happened and 
The aviation industry of the Kingdom of Sweden has Competent Authority, Appropriate Authority the status of them (which is public information).
the following characteristics:
1. 30 airlines have an operating licence The STA Civil Aviation Department is the competent Security
2. 70 airports are licensed Authority according to the EU/EASA regulatory 
3. There are 3.000 registered aircraft framework. The STA Civil Aviation Department is the appropriate 
4. 10.584 personnel licences authority for the security in aviation. They are 
The STA Civil Aviation Department is the Appropriate also involved in approving the security plans 
Authority according to the ICAO Annex 17 that companies active in aviation need to have 
Finances of the Swedish Transport Agency requirement. according to ICAO and EU regulations.
 
The parliament of Sweden has decided that those Governance, and Performance Monitoring Environment
who want to use transport, have to pay for it (in 
Dutch terms: de gebruiker betaalt). All charges Safety and security are the core competences of Environmental oversight is carried out by the 
should cover the costs for what is being used. The the Swedish Civil Aviation and Maritime Department. Environmental Protection Agency, which is part 
STA finances are provided by the Ministry of Finance After the Ministry has approved the instructions for of the Ministry of Environment and Enterprise. 
(MoF).  The Fees the industry has to pay for the negotiations, on behalf of Sweden representatives The monitoring of CO2 is also done by the 
services provided by the CAA are collected by the from the Transport Agency perform these Environmental Protection Agency.
MoF. These revenues are transferred to the CAA. negotiations. Subsequently the STA implements  
With that amount approximately 70-80% of the environmental rules and regulate this area.
STA-Civil Aviation activities can be financed. The 
15
