The Swedish Transport Agency negotiates on behalf for all the four traffic modes. What is coming is a 
of the Ministry (and therefore Sweden) with the ICAO constant dialogue between the different units in STA 
and within the EU on environmental matters for and is more task oriented within the sections of the 
aviation and the maritime sector. department. The sections are responsible for the 
regulation for future developments. 
Vicinity of airports
Summary
When it comes to the vicinity of Swedish airports 
there are national instructions. The airport requires There is a separate, independent regulator for civil 
national permits from the national government to aviation in Sweden, the Swedish Transport Agency 
be operative. The regional environmental courts (STA). This Agency was created in 2009 and is 
issue permits to the airports to operate within responsible to the government’s Ministry of Rural 
approved noise limits, and the local council, where Affairs and Infrastructure. The STA is responsible for 
the airport is located, monitors the performance. the regulation of all modes of transport: road, rail, 
 maritime and aviation.
Accident investigation
The STA has a staff of approx. 2000, of whom 220 are 
There is a law about accident investigation. There is dedicated to aviation. Whilst maritime and aviation 
an independent accident investigation authority. It’s are regulated by one department within the STA, 
a completely separate authority under the ministry this department comprises a number of sections, 
of Justice. each with their own maritime or aviation specialists. 
Some sections do cover both maritime and aviation, 
Approaching future developments but these are for generally for support functions or 
areas where a common approach is appropriate 
The approach of future developments (like drones, (e.g., market supervision, environment etc.)
information services, artificial intelligence (AI)) etc.  
is the responsibility of each section within the STA. 
The Department of Strategic Development and 
Management is looking in general what is coming 
16
