REGULATION OF AVIATION IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Introduction The UK formally left the European Union on the 31st – see Appendix 1. In this regard the DfT liaises with 
December 2020 (a process referred to as “Brexit”). the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, which has 
Accountability for the regulation of the civil aviation and is, therefore, no longer subject to the aviation accountability for all matters relating to the OTs. 
sector in the United Kingdom (UK) rests with the regulations of the European Parliament and 
Secretary of State for Transport. The responsibilities Commission. The UK’s European Union (Withdrawal) The UK also has three Crown Dependencies, these 
for regulation and oversight are discharged by Act 2018 caused all EU legislation that was in force being the Channel Island Bailiwicks of both Jersey 
the Department for Transport (DfT), and the United and effective on 31 December 2020 to be in force and Guernsey, and the Isle of Man. These have their 
Kingdom Civil Aviation Authority (CAA). There is a in the UK. This is “UK retained EU legislation.” That own governmental and civil aviation regulatory 
separate regulator for military aviation in the UK, legislation was then amended by UK secondary arrangements and work, through Memorandums 
this being the Military Aviation Authority (MAA). The legislation to become legally operable in the UK. of Understanding, to assist the UK Government 
regulation of aviation and aerospace is therefore a in meeting its obligations under the Chicago 
stand-alone function, separate to other regulators The principal domestic primary safety legislation is Convention. These legal contractual arrangements 
covering other modes of transport. There are other the Civil Aviation Act 1982 which enables secondary are overseen by the Ministry of Justice, which 
regulators covering other transport modes – such legislation, the Air Navigation Order 2016 (“the also helps coordinate consultations on proposed 
as the Office of Road and Rail. ANO”). This regulates aviation safety in the UK that changes to legislation, and interfaces with other 
is overseen by the CAA, alongside implementing government departments. See Appendix 2, or this 
The UK must comply with the international aviation regulations made under the UK Basic Regulation link, for a diagrammatic representation of these 
standards and recommended practices (SARPs) ((EU) Reg 2018/1139 as above), which is the principal intra-governmental arrangements for managing 
of the International Civil Aviation Organisation retained EU primary safety legislation. The ANO the UK’s State Safety Programme.
(ICAO). In terms of the implementation of ICAO also contains powers for the CAA to enforce the 
requirements, UK Government Directions to the CAA requirements of all UK aviation safety legislation and The Department for Transport (DfT)
(the Air Navigation (Chicago Convention) Directions establishes penalties and offences.
2007 (2022 amendment in progress)) require Accountability for the regulation of aviation in UK 
the CAA to co-ordinate and submit to ICAO any In addition to its accountabilities for the regulation rests with the government’s Secretary of State for 
necessary response to an ICAO State Letter.  The of aviation in the UK mainland (i.e., in England, Transport. 
CAA must also consider the optimum manner of Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales), the UK 
transposing ICAO requirements and proposing new government is accountable for the regulation of The Secretary of State for Transport has powers 
or amended domestic legislation where applicable. aviation in its fourteen Overseas Territories (OTs) to make regulations (primary and secondary 
17
