legislation) to take account of the ICAO Annexes, A lesson learned from the Covid pandemic was With regard to aviation security, the Department 
with responsibility for the secondary legislation that it’s very important for there to be no ambiguity is designated as the Appropriate Authority. The 
being delegated to the Minister for Transport. whatsoever with regard to the accountability for Department retains the responsibility for policy, 
Facilitation (ICAO Annex 9). coordinating activities with the police services, and 
The Department for Transport Aviation Directorate Ministry for Justice etc. but has delegated to the 
has a team of 80 – 90 staff covering a range of Aviation environmental matters are the CAA responsibility for regulation and oversight of 
policy areas including safety, general aviation, responsibility of the DfT, which liaises with the security matters in the aviation sector. 
personnel skills, CAA, decarbonisation/environment, Department of the Environment as necessary.
the future of flight, spaceflight, international and The Department is also responsible for negotiating 
EU engagement (incl. ICAO relationship/manging The Department is responsible for the UK’s National international agreements on matters relating to 
assembly etc), international travel, and facilitation. Aviation Policy. This policy was last published in 2013. aviation.
This team has grown in size since Brexit owing to 
an increase in legislative workload arising from the 
need to establish a full framework of UK aviation 
legislation to replace that of the European Union. 
Department for
In addition, there are a further approx. 90 staff 
Transport
covering overseas security inspections, security 
policy, and central support functions. The staff 
Civil Aviation Authority 23 Other Agencies, including:
members generally rotate through different 
• Safety • Office of Rail and Road
government departments on a regular basis: there 
• Security • Driver and Vehicles Standards 
are only a very few who have spent more than 3 - 5 
• Environment Agency
• Consumer Protection • Maritime and Coastguard 
years in the aviation policy section and who have 
• Economic Regulation Agency
a high degree of corporate aviation knowledge. 
• National Highways
• Network Rail
The staff are not aviation experts or specialists 
• Aricraft Accident Investigation 
and rely on the technical advice provided from 
Board
other sources, principally from the UK CAA. The 
exception to this is the Air Accident Investigation 
Branch (AAIB) which, whilst part of the DfT, functions 
Figure 5 – Organisation of the Department of Transport UK.
independently. 
18
