UK Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) on the development of strategies and plans, and The CAA’s fees are reviewed annually. Proposals to 
they are discussed at high level meetings between change the fees are promulgated for consultation 
The UK CAA is a public corporation, established by DfT and CAA. This ensures alignment without by industry and any other stakeholders. The CAA 
an Act of Parliament in 1972 as an independent comprising the CAA’s role as an independent also receives funding from EUROCONTROL for route 
specialist aviation regulator. Its sponsoring regulator. charges relating to the users of UK airspace. The DfT 
Government Department is the Department for may provide additional funding to the CAA through 
Transport (DfT). The CAA has a well-established overall aviation grants (known as Section 16 funding – covered 
Regulatory Safety Management System (RSMS) under Section 16 of the Civil Aviation Act 1982) for 
The CAA is the UK’s independent specialist aviation which includes the implementation of ICAO specific work and projects such as, for example, 
and airspace, safety, security, consumer rights, requirements. developing State Safety Partnerships. 
spaceflight, and economic regulator. The CAA is 
tasked to ensure: Policy and rulemaking are developed by CAA’s The CAA has delegated responsibility for certain 
1.  the aviation industry meets the highest safety central Corporate Policy & Strategy Team (where tasks to representative industry bodies, such as the 
standards applicable) and each regulatory area (responsible Light Aircraft Association, and the British Microlight 
2.  consumers have a choice, value for money, and for safety oversight and inspection) in consultation Aircraft Association. These tasks include the issue 
are protected and treated fairly when they fly with its legal team and overseen by an Aviation of permits to fly, or issuing recommendations to 
3.  the efficient use of airspace to manage the Legislation Programme (ALP) forum. Policy, and the CAA to issue pilot licences. It should be noted 
environmental impact of aviation on local rulemaking in particular, are undertaken in that these delegated responsibilities relate solely to 
communities and the reduction of CO2 partnership with the DfT as the sponsoring dept. activities which are outside the sphere of the ICAO 
emissions Annexes.
4.  compliance with regulations so that the aviation The CAA maintains a very positive, collaborative 
industry effectively manages security risks relationship with the DfT and other government The CAA has a commercial arm, known as CAA 
departments, and staff were keen to emphasize the International (CAAI). CAAI provides services such as 
The CAA receives a priorities letter from the benefits of this approach. consultancy and training, and provides resources 
Secretary of State at the start of each financial year under contract to undertake for example, audits 
to help ensure alignment of the Authority with the The CAA is funded primarily by fees levied upon the and inspections on behalf of other authorities. In 
government’s wider objectives. The DfT also has industry that it regulates: e.g. fees for the issue and this latter regard, it provides resources to assist the 
a team that sponsors the CAA. The CAA and the maintenance of approvals, licences, etc. set fees UK Crown Dependencies in auditing their safety 
Sponsorship Team regularly consult each other for its regulatory activities in the field of security. oversight arrangements.
19
