The UK CAA currently has 1,631 members of staff. State Safety Programme to ensure that it is relevant airports and air traffic control. In Territories where 
and applicable to the nature of the aviation the civil aviation regulator does not have the 
On 30 August 2022 the UK Government launched an operations in those Territories. resources to undertake the task themselves, ASSI 
independent review of the CAA. The review of the can be designated by the Governor to perform 
CAA will focus on: A company, Air Safety Support International (ASSI), the civil aviation regulatory tasks on behalf of the 
1.  its efficiency and effectiveness in delivering its was established after the ICAO audit of the UK in Governor.
services currently, and for the future 2001. This was considered to be important from 
2. its role, form, function and delivery model the point of view of recognising that the nature ASSI is designated to perform the regulation of 
3.  the corporate governance and assurance of operations in the OTs differs considerably aviation security on behalf of the Governor, in all 
mechanisms underpinning the organisation from those in the UK mainland. It has proven of the Overseas Territories, working closely with 
4.  its relationship with the Department for Transport to be invaluable in helping the OTs to maintain aviation authorities where they exist.
and how the 2 organisations work together to compliance with the ICAO standards, and in 
deliver a quality service for the UK enabling them to achieve and retain FAA Category The UK’s three Crown Dependencies (Jersey, 
5.  how it priorities match up to the government’s 1 status. ASSI has established a safety performance Guernsey, and the Isle of Man) contract the UK CAA 
wider objectives, taking into consideration its role forum for the OTs which meets twice a year. ASSI (CAA International) to undertake regular external 
as an independent regulator was initially fully financed by the UK government. audits of their safety oversight arrangements.
In the last five years the OTs also contribute to the 
The final report is expected to be signed off by early costs of ASSI as they see and appreciate the benefit Corporate governance and assurance 
summer 2023. of the organisation. mechanisms 
Overseas Territories and Crown ASSI is a not-for-profit, wholly-owned, subsidiary In addition to the audits and inspections 
Dependencies company of the UK CAA, established under undertaken by the ICAO of the aviation regulatory 
Directions from the UK’s DfT. It has a staff of 20. The arrangements in the UK, the following monitoring 
The Overseas Territories have separate constitutions company’s primary objective is to help provide and reporting mechanisms are currently in place:
with elected governments who are responsible a more cohesive system of civil aviation safety 1.  On 30 August 2022 the UK Government launched 
for the day-to-day administration. They also have regulation in the UK OTs. It supports the Overseas an independent review of the CAA. (see above).
a Governor, appointed by HM The King, whose Territories’ own authorities in the safety regulation 2.  The Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
responsibilities include external affairs, security, of all aspects of civil aviation, including the licensing chairs a quarterly meeting of the State Safety 
defence and air safety. The OTs have their own of personnel and the certification of aircraft, airlines, Board. The membership of this Board comprises 
20
