representatives from the DfT, the CAA, ASSI, AAIB, Kingdom was transferred from the DfT to the CAA. Within the UK there are circa 1,500 Directed Parties, 
and the MAA. This change was driven primarily by the need to and these are overseen by a team of approx. 50 
3.  The CAA produces and publishes an Annual resource the activity. The CAA covers the cost of its CAA auditors based at various locations across the 
Report and its Accounts. security regulation work by charging the regulated UK (many of whom work from home).
4.  The UK National Aviation Safety Plan (NASP) is entities (“Directed Parties”): i.e., it is now a user-
directly linked to the global aviation safety plan funded function. The government provides funding Since transferring the role of security regulation 
published by the ICAO and complements the UK only for specific projects and tasks. to the CAA, some synergies have been identified 
State Safety Programme. It lists the actions to be with safety regulation however, the CAA is keen to 
taken over the next 2 years to improve aviation A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been emphasise that these should not be overstated. An 
safety management and to reduce the risks of established which sets out the broad division of example of such synergies lies in the area of the 
aviation operations. responsibilities between the Secretary of State for regulation of dangerous goods. In addition, Safety 
5.  Safety occurrences and safety data are Transport and the CAA in respect of the regulation Management System (SMS) principles are being 
reviewed and overseen by the CAA. of aviation security. A further detailed delineation of used to develop a Security Management System 
the respective aviation security roles of each of the (SecMS) however, this is currently a “work-in-
It should be noted that there is a clear separation parties is set out in a Statement of Responsibilities, progress”. 
between regulatory activities and service which is appended to the MoU. The DfT retains 
provision: these functions are delivered in separate responsibility for security strategy, risk (threat Environmental matters
organisations. The national air traffic service picture), international relations and policy. The 
provider, NATS, became a company in its own right, CAA has a team of circa 30 staff who are security The CAA’s powers in relation to aviation’s 
as a wholly owned subsidiary of the UK CAA, in 1996 experts and who provide advice to the DfT on environmental impacts are currently focused 
and was privatized in 2001. matters of strategy and policy, and who draft rather than broad, and the CAA takes the view that 
proposed regulations. government and industry own the principal levers 
Security when it comes to managing and mitigating those 
The aviation sector is unique in the UK in having impacts. The CAA encourages industry to lead 
The DfT is the “Appropriate Authority” under the an independent security regulator: the DfT has on these challenges and advises and supports 
UK national security programme however, in 2014 responsibility for the regulation of all other transport government on the reduction of the industry’s 
the role of aviation security regulator in the United mode security matters. carbon emissions, the sharing of best practice and 
 
21
