the development of international initiatives such as 3.  reporting on the sustainability performance on individual regulatory decisions);
CORSIA (Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme of industry, including noise, and providing 3.  challenge and support the CAA on our progress 
for International Aviation). It also collaborates with information to consumers on the environmental towards our strategic focus on improving 
several international bodies, such as ICAO, EASA and impact of aviation; environmental performance, both within the 
the European Commission who all have a role in the 4.  advising and supporting the UK government on aviation and aerospace sectors and within 
environmental regulation of aviation. domestic and international policy; the CAA itself, including informing the delivery 
5.  reducing the impact of our corporate activities and future evolution of our environmental 
The CAA does not have a duty with regard to the and operations; sustainability strategy;
environment across all of its functions, rather, the 6.  assessing local environmental impacts in 4.  provide advice and critique on the CAA’s 
CAA’s functions are largely domain-specific and relevant regulatory activity and monitoring how research and help identify where further 
governed by separate regimes, which means industry is adapting to climate change; research may be needed to inform our 
that its environmental functions are equally 7.  taking into account the environment in sustainability agenda.
decentralised. regulation and oversight.
The Terms of Reference for the Panel can be found 
Information about the way the CAA discharges The CAA Environmental Sustainability Panel is a here.
its duties within the environment, for example specialist, non-statutory body providing expert 
with regard to airworthiness, innovation, airspace technical advice to the CAA.  The Panel provides Summary and key points.
changes and modernisation, and reporting can be both. support and challenge on the delivery of the 
found in a document that set outs the CAA’s areas CAA’s environmental sustainability strategy. The key The UK has an aviation safety and security regulator, 
of work in the environmental sustainability strategy. activities of the Panel are to: namely the Civil Aviation Authority, which is separate 
1.  provide expert technical advice to the CAA to from the government’s Department for Transport. 
In May 2022 the CAA published its environmental support our work programme relating to our The CAA was initially established in 1972 for matters 
sustainability strategy which sets out how it will work environmental roles, or on specific tasks that we of safety regulation and took on the role of security 
with the whole aviation system, both domestically may require, including input to our response to regulator in 2014.
and globally, to improve environmental any relevant external consultations;
performance in aviation. The Strategy explains that 2.  help the CAA to understand and take account The aviation sector is unique in the UK in having 
the CAA will focus on the following areas: of environmental interests and impacts in our an independent security regulator: the DfT has 
1.  enabling development of Jet Zero technology; regulatory policy and framework (although the responsibility for the regulation of security matters 
2. co-leading the modernisation of airspace; Panel will not be expected to review or comment for all other transport modes.
22
