9.  Does the State have responsibility for any Use of Resources - Efficiency and Effectiveness 3. oversight: funded from central government or  
Overseas Territories, with perhaps multiple CAAs? from charges for its oversight of the industry, 
If so, how are these responsibilities allocated, 15.  What measures are in place to measure the or from services that it may provide (e.g. ATM/
managed, and coordinated? efficiency and effectiveness of the arrangements ANS))?
to deliver the regulatory services? 
10.  Has the regulator established an overall Potential Conflicts of Interest
aviation Safety Regulatory Management 16.  What is the scope and size of the country’s 
System, including all organizations involved in aviation industry? How are resources managed 20.  Is there clear separation between the regulatory 
implementing the ICAO requirements and, where so as to ensure adequate regulatory coverage organization(s) and service providers (e.g. air 
applicable, the EU/EASA Authority requirements? of the industry? navigation service providers)?
11.  Are there any plans to change the current 17.  What is the size (in terms of staff resource) Use of Data
regulatory arrangements? of each of the organizations responsible for 
implementing the mandatory ICAO /EU/EASA 21.  How are the aviation safety data collected, 
12.  What corporate governance and assurance safety regulatory requirements? reviewed, managed and used by the competent 
mechanisms are used to underpin the overall authority(ies)?
regulatory organizational arrangements? 18.  How do/does the competent authority(ies) 
establish priorities and allocate resources 22.  How is environmental regulatory performance 
13.  Does the regulator delegate or otherwise “sub- (e.g. does it use a risk or performance based measured?
contract” any of its regulatory functions, either oversight system)? 
to other Competent Authorities, Notified Bodies, Communications
Qualified Entities (QEs) or industry representative 19.  ow is the cost of the regulation of aviation 
bodies? If so, why and what aspects of regulation funded? e.g. is the funding of the Country’s 1. How are communications managed:
are delegated in this way? Where do the aviation regulatory responsibilities of: 1. For regulatory staff?
accountabilities and responsibilities lie for the  1.  policy: funded from central government or from 2. For the regulated industry?
oversight of the delegated tasks charges for its oversight of the industry? 3. For the public? 
  2.  authorization: funded from central government 
14.  Has the State requested EASA to conduct work or from charges for the authorisations/ How is the effectiveness of these communication 
on its behalf? certification or its oversight of the industry? methods measured and assessed?
27
