Summary and conclusions
The Caribbean Netherlands five years after the transition
Impact on the population
Rob Bijl and Evert Pommer
In October 2006, the Hague played host to a conference on the future constitutional struc-
ture of the Caribbean Netherlands. The final declaration contained a commitment to a joint
evaluation of the development of that new constitutional order by the Netherlands and the
islands of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba. The evaluation was to take place five years
after the administrative transition on 10 October 2010. In order to make this evaluation
possible in 2015, preparatory studies were carried out. The study described in this report,
which was carried out between January and June 2015, focused on the consequences of
transition for the population of the islands.
Research questions
The research questions formulated by the Commission charged with evaluating the devel-
opment of the new constitutional structure for the Caribbean Netherlands (Commissie eva-
luatie uitwerking nieuwe staatkundige structuur Caribisch Nederland) were as follows.
1 How has the economic situation on the islands developed since 10 October 2010?
Which factors (e.g. relating to the fiscal legislation) are or have been important in the
economic development of the islands?
2 How has the physical infrastructure developed, including the accessibility of the islands
by water and by air? How has the level of infrastructural facilities evolved against the
background of the economic development since 10 October 2010?
3 How has implementation progressed of the agreements that emerged from the
administrative consultation on 31 January 2008 to formulate standards, taking into
account the specific circumstances cited in the list of resolutions in that consultation,
for a level of facilities that is acceptable within the Netherlands in Bonaire, Sint Eusta-
tius and Saba in the priority fields of education, public health, social security and public
safety?
4 How has the level of facilities developed against the background of the particular char-
acter of the Caribbean Netherlands and against the background of the agreement
reached on formulating standards for a level of facilities that is acceptable within the
Netherlands?
In addition, the study team was requested to provide an insight into the role played by rel-
evant actors, and specifically into the following aspects:
309 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
