1 How has the policy pursued on the level of facilities in the fields of education, public
health, social security, public safety and physical infrastructure impacted on the popu-
lation?
2 What has been the contribution of the ‘public bodies’ (the official status of the islands
under Dutch law), central government and other relevant actors to the development of
the level of facilities?
3 How has the distribution of responsibilities between the public bodies (islands) and
central government functioned in respect of the development of the level of facilities?
And what was the level of cooperation in this regard?
At the request of the commissioning party and the supervisory committee for this study,
extensive attention was devoted to the experiences of the population (question 5). This is
in line with the advice of the Dutch Council of State that this part of the study should focus
primarily on the tangible social impact on the daily lives of island residents as a result of
the transition to the new constitutional order on the islands.
The influence of the various actors on the level of facilities achieved (questions 6 and 7) is
not simple to determine decisively within the short timeframe of this study, due to the
other factors that could also play a role. Policy efforts, or the lack thereof, are often just
one of the factors that determine the social situation of island residents. Causality is not
easy to determine. For example, health status and the level of safety depend in part on
factors that lie outside the scope of policy influence. Interviews held on the islands and the
survey of residents are the main sources used to provide an impression of the role of the
various actors. This is described in chapters 8 and 9 of this report, which are concerned
with the perception and appreciation of life on the islands by the population and by
administrators, policymakers and professionals, representatives of civil-society organisa-
tions and members of the business community working in the priority fields. Ascertaining
the contribution made by the public bodies, central government and other relevant actors
to the development of facilities was however not an independent element of the present
study, nor was the distribution of responsibilities and the cooperation between the public
bodies and central government.
The perceptions, observations and levels of appreciation by respondents can be regarded
as ‘social facts’. People act in accordance with this reality, whether or not it is based on
empirically observable facts. Or, to quote the Thomas theorem: ‘If men define situations as
real, they are real in their consequences.’ In other words, the way in which citizens perceive
their social situation as described in this report cannot be dismissed as the sum of mere
opinions, but must be regarded as a reality that is relevant from both a policy and a politi-
cal perspective.
310 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
