Research design
When carrying out this study, allowance was made for the limited availability of data that
could serve as indicators for the situation on the islands. This applies not only for the num-
ber of indicators, but also for their development over time. The amount of information
available proved limited in many areas. It is important to be aware that no baseline meas-
urements were carried out in 2010, so that any statements about the consequences of the
decisions taken on 10 October 2010 must be treated with caution. The limited time availa-
ble also made it difficult for the researchers to collect extensive primary data themselves.
Despite these constraints, scp did endeavour to gather new supplementary data within a
short space of time. The following activities were undertaken to this end:
– A representative survey was conducted among the population of the three islands
(Saba: 146 respondents; Sint Eustatius: 202 respondents; Bonaire: 401 respondents) to
ascertain their perception of the situation following the administrative transition;
– Seven intensive discussions were conducted with focus groups made up of island resi-
dents;
– More than 60 interviews were held with a total of some 150 administrators, civil serv-
ants, professionals, representatives of civil-society organisations, entrepreneurs and
citizens on the islands, focusing on their experiences of the situation on the islands fol-
lowing the administrative transition;
– Interviews were conducted with approximately 100 island residents in their preferred
language (Dutch, Papiamento, English) during six drop-in sessions with the researchers
on the islands;
– A webpage was made available on which island residents could tell their stories about
and recount their experiences of the administrative transition; approximately 25 resi-
dents made use of this facility;
– Interviews were held with inspectors charged with overseeing the priority facilities, as
well as with officials from the ministries involved.
The remit of the study was to provide as factual and objective a picture as possible of
developments in the Caribbean Netherlands in the individual areas highlighted and in the
socio-economic situation. To achieve this, statistical data, microdata (from individual per-
sons) and qualitative insights are indispensable. Existing sources were used to address the
research questions, including a large number of policy documents and information from
supervisory authorities and civil servants involved in the transition.
How has the economic situation developed?
Island character and scale impose limits on economy
The majority of commodities and other goods and products used on the islands have to be
brought in from elsewhere. However, the (very) limited size of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and
Saba, in terms of both area and population, imposes limits on the size of the local econ-
311 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
