omy and the available spending potential. If there are too few users, it is not (financially)
attractive to offer a given amenity, either commercially or non-commercially. The scale and
the associated cost disbenefits also play a role: a shrinking market increases the average
unit costs, which means that, without government intervention, the product or service in
question becomes more expensive. This applies especially for Saba and Sint Eustatius, and
to a lesser extent also for Bonaire.
One-sided economic structure makes islands economically vulnerable
All three islands have a one-sided economic structure. The limited number of economic
activities, which dominate the local economy, makes all three islands economically vulner-
able. To what extent the overall picture has been influenced by the decisions of 10 October
2010 cannot be established on the basis of the available data (from Statistics Netherlands
(cbs) ). However, the opinions and perceptions of the local population and business com-
munity do enable a more qualitative picture to be formed. That picture is not universally
positive.
Increased tax revenues ploughed back in through (temporary) rafts of measures
The administrative reforms also involved a review of the tax system. One key agreement in
this regard was that the tax burden in 2011, the year that the new system was introduced,
would remain roughly the same (at macro-level) as in 2010. In reality, however, following
the introduction of the new system, tax revenues turned out higher than agreed. A range of
measures was subsequently introduced to channel the excess tax revenues back to taxpay-
ers. This operation also helped to sustain purchasing power and boost the business cli-
mate. However, it is unclear how this operation worked out in practice for the different
sections of the population.
Strong impact of price increases on purchasing power
Price rises have had a major impact on the purchasing power of island residents. Between
2010 and 2013, the purchasing power of wages on Bonaire fell by 4% (wages +6%, prices
+10%), by 14% in Sint Eustatius by 14% (wages +2%, prices +16%) and by 6% in Saba (+6%
wages and +12% prices). The consumer price index has only recently fallen (first quarter of
2015). The steep price increases were largely caused by external influences, such as energy
and food prices. Although it is difficult to gauge the impact of government policy and the
administrative reforms on prices, they are likely to have had less effect than external fac-
tors. What is clear is that local businesses raised their prices in response to higher taxes,
higher costs and the introduction of the us dollar.
Impact of administrative reforms on business climate unclear
Since the constitutional reforms, efforts have been made to improve the business climate
in the Caribbean Netherlands. Those efforts include offering finance facilities to businesses
and temporarily lowering business property tax rates. The shift from direct to indirect taxa-
tion was also intended to strengthen the economies of the islands. However, the limited
312 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
