availability of macroeconomic data mean it is not possible at this juncture to determine the
impact of these measures.
How has the physical infrastructure developed?
In the period after 10 October 2010, a great deal of attention was devoted to the existing
(physical) infrastructure on Sint Eustatius, Saba and Bonaire. Several government agencies
looked at the quality, availability and price levels of the various infrastructural facilities.
This administrative attention marked a recognition that adequate infrastructural facilities
are important for the proper functioning of the islands. This exercise resulted in the draw-
ing up of master plans for the airports, and new plans were also developed in other areas,
including increasing the sustainability and security of supply of energy and improving the
water supply. The Netherlands contributed funding to the planning activities and also sup-
plied relevant expertise.
The main financial contribution by the Netherlands towards the implementation of the
plans is focused on setting parameters. For example, the Netherlands is willing to pay for
the necessary investments in airport safety, but the construction of a new terminal is regar-
ded as the responsibility of the islands themselves. This is an administrative choice. More
fundamental are the discussions on overdue maintenance of the infrastructure and the
allocation of the relevant responsibilities. The main area of concern here is the quality and
maintenance of the road network, which is an island responsibility. Earlier studies have
made clear that the resources made available are not sufficient.
A pertinent factor in the discussions on the allocation of responsibilities is that the islands
have no capital account for servicing the funding of investments and that there is a lack of
adequate reserves. In addition, the applicable legislation on funding public bodies in Bon-
aire, Sint Eustatius and Saba (Wet FinBES) imposes requirements in respect of a (balanced)
budget. Combined with the very limited financial scope, these requirements mean that the
islands are unable to meet their responsibilities in relation to the necessary investments in
infrastructure.
A further factor that particularly affects the island population, but also local businesses, is
that most of the efforts made to date have taken place behind closed doors and are there-
fore not (yet) very apparent to the public. Many of the plans made only recently started to
be implemented, or are still on the drawing board. Patience is therefore required before
tangible results will become visible. This is by no means unusual for the realisation of phys-
ical projects, including infrastructure; the period between plan formulation and implemen-
tation usually spans several years, something that is not surprising given the necessary
investments and the many different interests that may be involved. Ensuring that the vari-
ous local and central authorities involved keep the public properly and adequately
informed can of course help here.
313 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
