Have standards been formulated for the level of facilities on the islands?
The purpose of the administrative agreements was to formulate standards for a level of
priority facilities on the islands that was acceptable within the Netherlands. Explicit
account was taken of the specific circumstances referred to earlier. The Statute is also clear
on this point. Moreover, the specific circumstances will not be the same for all facilities.
Each policy domain has its own specific circumstances, which may lead to a different con-
figuration than is usual in the European Netherlands. Separate agreements have therefore
been made for each policy domain, and where necessary individual improvement pro-
grammes have been initiated.
It is apparent that there was no cohesive approach or vision by the ministries involved with
regard to the development of the Caribbean Netherlands. Each department developed its
own plans and set the size of the available budgets. Some ministerial plans were more
closely matched to the level of facilities in the Caribbean Netherlands (Ministry of Social
Affairs and Employment), while others were more geared to the Dutch situation (Ministry
of Health, Welfare and Sport, Ministry of Education, Culture and Science, Ministry of Infra-
structure and the Environment).
In formulating the targeted level of facilities in the area of primary and secondary education,
the situation in the European Netherlands was taken as a starting point, and the island-
specific circumstances were taken into account to only a limited degree. The aim was to
raise the quality of primary and secondary schools to a level that would be acceptable for
the European Netherlands by 2016. This means that all schools on the islands should offer
education of sufficient basic quality by 2016. The scale of the islands is too small for them
to achieve the same target for higher education.
An important benchmarking event for the future of education in the Caribbean Nether-
lands was an education conference involving all stakeholders. The outcome of the confer-
ence was an education agenda for the Caribbean Netherlands, ‘Working together for qual-
ity’ (Samen werken aan kwaliteit), which set out a raft of ambitions and agreements. This
agenda is designed to ensure that the quality of education on Saba, Sint Eustatius and
Bonaire is raised by 2016 to a level that is acceptable according to Dutch and Caribbean
standards. Briefly, the agenda sets out the following five priorities:
– Raising quality;
– Strengthening the quality of teachers, school heads and school boards;
– Tailored educational support;
– Appealing vocational education;
– Setting the right conditions.
In the area of health care, too, standards in the European Netherlands were taken as a start-
ing point. The aim is to gradually bring the standard of health care on the islands up to that
314 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
