in the European part of the Kingdom. This will demand fundamental and structural
improvements to health care in the Caribbean Netherlands. The system must be equally
accessible to all island inhabitants. It was decided during the administrative consultation
on 31 January 2008 that standards would be formulated to determine what is meant by ‘a
level of facilities that is acceptable within the Netherlands’. During the ensuing period,
however, these standards were not defined (quantified) in any further detail. Agreements
were however reached during the administrative consultation on the steps to be taken.
Those steps are as follows:
– A system of public health insurance has to be developed. This would be implemented
on 1 January 2011 and entail reimbursement of all medical expenses for all inhabitants
of the Caribbean Netherlands.
– A list of priority investments has to be drawn up for the health care infrastructure
(buildings and inventory).
– The scope for purchasing necessary medical care in the neighbouring countries (medi-
cal treatment abroad) has to be explored.
– The Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport has to finance the formulation of a long-
term health care accommodation plan for the Caribbean Netherlands.
– In the context of combating infectious disease, the Netherlands has to endeavour to
bring the Caribbean Netherlands up to the standards set by the International Health
Regulations.
With regard to social security, a conservative legislative approach was favoured. The Dutch
system was not taken as a starting point, because introducing this system would act as a
pull factor and seriously weaken the competitive position of the islands. The constitutional
transition was therefore framed by central government in terms of equating the level of
social security that is acceptable within the Netherlands to the system already in force in
the Caribbean Netherlands. An exception was made for retirement and disability benefits,
which were raised sharply on 1 January, though to a level that is still considerably below
that in the European Netherlands.
According to the Minister of Social Affairs and Employment, further improvements to the
statutory minimum wage and the linked benefits need to take place within the parameters
of the economic situation, balanced social relations and available budgets. The agreements
made in the area of labour and social security are largely set out in the lists of resolutions
made at the conference in 2006 and the administrative consultations in 2008 (31 January,
18 June and 20 November), 2009 (3 November) and 2010 (18 April). In most cases, the later
agreements built on or elaborated the earlier agreements. In one case, a shift of emphasis
can be observed over time. This relates mainly to the question of the extent to which the
situation on the islands before the transition or the situation in the European Netherlands
should be taken as a starting point for the new regulations. The general section of the final
declaration of 2006 states that, in principle, the legislation of the Netherlands Antilles will
remain in force. The 2008 declaration, however, reports that social assistance benefit in the
315 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
