Caribbean Netherlands will come into line with the social assistance arrangements in the
European Netherlands. The 2009 resolutions then deviate from this principle again as
regards the level of benefits.
It was agreed that the European and Caribbean Netherlands would work together to pre-
vent excessive price increases as a result of the introduction of the us dollar. It was also
agreed that the islands would take the lead in informing citizens and businesses. A new law
was introduced as one of the means of preventing excessive price increases. Under this
legislation (Prijzenwet bes), the administrative colleges can intervene if goods and services
are offered at prices that are against the general interest. The law was adopted from Antil-
lean legislation.
In the administrative consultation on 18 June 2008, it was determined that a new fiscal sys-
tem would be developed and implemented in the legislation of the Caribbean Netherlands.
The November 2008 list of resolutions stipulates that efforts will be made to minimise the
income effects when setting the rates and levy structure for taxes and social insurance con-
tributions. It was also agreed that the impact of the changes in tax and social insurance
contributions, as well as other activities such as the introduction of health insurance,
would be identified after the change of status had taken place.
As regards public safety in the Caribbean Netherlands, international safety standards and the
implementation of central legislation on safety played a major role. Those international
standards relate among other things to the prison system and the protection of civil avia-
tion. It was agreed that the Ministry of Security and Justice would embark on the introduc-
tion of phased improvements and, as with social affairs, that the existing Antillean legisla-
tion would be taken as a starting point. It is important to note that the agreements made
in 2008 relate only to the nature and extent of the safety provisions. No performance tar-
gets were agreed on matters such as crime clear-up rates, emergency service response
times or the percentage of cases dropped by the public prosecution service. The agree-
ments also say nothing about the adequacy of the agreed quality and quantity standards
for achieving the envisaged level of safety. It is unclear precisely what the level of ambition
is for public safety in the Caribbean Netherlands.
Major shortfalls were identified in all policy domains in 2010. The efforts made by the dif-
ferent departments in seeking to reduce the deficits in the priority facilities are revealed in
the financial resources made available for this (table S.1). In 2014, central government-fun-
ded expenditure totalled more than 248 million euros. Expenditure by the island adminis-
trations took the total government spending for 2014 to 316 million euros, equivalent to
13,020 euros per inhabitant. Of this total, 40% was funded by the islands concerned, with
60% coming from the European Netherlands.
316 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
