tion for both weak and outstanding pupils fell short; learning disadvantage was severe;
secondary school attainment was below-par; and secondary schools in particular faced
administrative problems. In addition, school accommodation and teaching resources were
inadequate.
The Inspectorate’s report functioned more or less as a baseline measurement and formed
the basis for the ambitions in relation to the transition as laid down in the Education
Agenda 2011. The following five priorities were stated:
– Raising quality;
– Strengthening the quality of teachers, school heads and school boards;
– Tailored educational support;
– Appealing vocational education;
– Setting the right conditions.
The norm is that a pupil from the Caribbean Netherlands should be capable of following a
further education course in the Netherlands without problems. Against the backdrop of
this norm, the ambitions set out in the Education Agenda, and with reference to the situa-
tion at the time of the ‘baseline measurement”, we discuss the status of education on the
islands. The emphasis is on the quality of the educational process.
The quality of education in the Caribbean Netherlands was seriously below par in 2008.
Not one primary or secondary school met the basic quality standards. Today, four of the
twelve publicly funded primary schools meet those basic standards: one school in Sint
Eustatius and three in Bonaire. Based on the Inspectorate reports, a number of other pri-
mary schools will follow suit within the foreseeable future. The educational process has
improved compared with 2008, and schools which are still failing to meet the basic quality
standards in full do now meet them in some areas.
It may be of note that the school in Saba, which was in a relatively good position in 2008,
still does not meet the basic quality standards, though it is improving. According to the
Inspectorate, two of the primary schools in Sint Eustatius which do not yet meet all parts of
the basic quality standards are likely to do so within two years; the other primary school
appears to have further to go in this respect. The primary schools in Bonaire which do not
yet meet the basic quality standards also have a lot of ground to make up. Primary educa-
tion on the three islands still falls short in terms of quality assurance and attention for
pupils who need extra care or support.
None of the secondary schools meet the basic quality standards, and according to the
Inspectorate reports there is no prospect of them doing so in the short term. The reports
refer to turbulent times in the (recent) past at all three schools, and regard weak school
governance as a major cause of the lack of educational quality. The ambition of strength-
318 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
