ening teaching staffs, school heads and school boards has not yet been achieved. There is
also a lack of continuity of teaching teams and school leadership.
As regards the ambition of making vocational education more appealing, there are now
more options available to prospective students. Saba and Sint Eustatius now have a mod-
est range of courses available at senior secondary vocational level, while the existing offer-
ing in Bonaire has been expanded, and a growing number of students now attend courses
on their home island. Efforts have been made to put in place the parameters as laid down
in the Education Agenda.
Lack of data means we are unable to make any statements concerning the norm that pupils
from the islands should be able to continue their education in the Netherlands without
problems. A few dozen students each year make use of a special finance package (opstart-
toelage) which supplements the normal student finance and makes it possible to follow a
senior secondary vocational or university course in the Netherlands. An unknown number
also study in the Netherlands without making use of this scheme. However, we do not
know whether students originating from the Caribbean Netherlands face difficulties (more
than other students) in matching their prior education to their new studies. Even if data
were available on lack of study success, or dropout from study, it is not clear whether this
would be due to shortcomings in the prior education or to other factors.
One problem area – and therefore a pointer for improvement – which emerged very clearly
is the discrepancy between the mother tongue of students and the language of instruction
and examinations at school. For this reason, Sint Eustatius has decided, like Saba earlier,
that English will be the language of education. The state secretary for education has descri-
bed this as a radical decision, but one that is better matched to the situation of the stu-
dents and is likely eventually to lead to better school achievements. In Bonaire, the current
situation will continue for the time being, with many students facing a discrepancy
between using Papiamento or Spanish at home and Dutch at school.
Another problem area is the absence of special schools and a shortage of specialist care for
a proportion of students with one or more cognitive and/or behavioural problems or with
disabilities. At present they are accommodated in mainstream schools, but the care availa-
ble for them does not always appear to be adequate.
2 Health care
The health status of the population of the Caribbean Netherlands has improved since
2004, especially in terms of life expectancy at birth and at age 65. Statistics Netherlands
(cbs) also concludes from a survey held on all three islands in 2013 that ‘three-quarters of
the population of the Caribbean Netherlands feel healthy’. Stubborn health problems
include overweight and high blood pressure, diabetes and severe headaches.
319 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
