In the administrative consultation on 31 January 2008, it was decided that standards would
be formulated to enable the level of facilities to be assessed on the basis of what was
‘acceptable within the Netherlands’ (see: Besluitenlijst bes bestuurlijk overleg 31 January
2008 in The Hague (in Dutch)). In the ensuing period, these standards were not defined in
quantitative terms; the only quantitative standard in this context applies to Bonaire, where
80% of (medical specialist) care must be provided in Bonaire itself. A key reason that no
targets can be cited is the lack of sufficient data on which to base the status of care.
The following steps were agreed in relation to health care in the administrative consulta-
tion on 31 January 2008:
– This would be implemented on 1 January 2011 and entail reimbursement of all medical
expenses for all inhabitants of the Caribbean Netherlands.
– A list of priority investments has to be drawn up for the health care infrastructure
(buildings and inventory.
– The scope for purchasing necessary medical care in the neighbouring countries (medi-
cal treatment abroad) has to be explored.
– The Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport has to finance the formulation of a long-
term health care accommodation plan for the Caribbean Netherlands.
– In the context of combating infectious disease, the Netherlands has to endeavour to
bring the Caribbean Netherlands up to the standards set by the International Health
Regulations. To this end the Netherlands, in collaboration with the Caribbean Nether-
lands and the other parts of the Kingdom, would endeavour to set up and facilitate a
‘focal point’ for the former Netherlands Antilles.
The list of resolutions following the administrative consultation on 20 November 2008
states that the main outlines of a medium-term plan for health care and accommodation
in the Caribbean Netherlands (26 projects covering the full spectrum of care, public health
and youth care) would be adopted and form the basis for a multi-year programme of spe-
cific and necessary improvements (see: Besluitenlijst bes bestuurlijk overleg of 20 Novem-
ber 2008 (in Dutch)). These improvements span the full spectrum of care: in addition to
improvements in curative care, youth health care and nursing and personal care, particular
attention would be given to mental health care, dependency care and care for disabled
people, on account of the shortfalls in these areas. Special attention was also to be devo-
ted to the further development of public health at local level and island-wide preventative
efforts in the field of public health.
Health care on the islands has improved in many areas. This is the view of the population
in the years 2010-2013, and that view is supported by the Dutch Health Care Inspectorate
and this report. The hospital in Bonaire is a success story. It is now a modern hospital offer-
ing proper medical care, which has also enabled the number of journeys to receive medical
treatment abroad to be greatly reduced.
320 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
