But there are other successes to report, with much being achieved in areas ranging from
public health care, in which professionals are now working on every island, to care for the
elderly and dependency care. The supply of drugs is now well regulated. Oral care in Saba
and Sint Eustatius is good, but variable in Bonaire. Each island now has a youth and family
care centre. Efforts have been made in many places with regard to the introduction of it
and medical reporting. Two helicopters are available for transporting medical emergencies
from Saba and Sint Eustatius.
There is less positive news on nursing home care in Saba, though major improvements
have been made following the introduction of special measures with heightened supervi-
sion. The nursing home in Sint Eustatius is better, but there is a lack of good day care. That
facility is by contrast available in the nursing home in Bonaire, rated by the Inspectorate
has good.
As regards gp care, Dutch GPs in Saba who are entered in the big-register of healthcare
professionals receive a better rating from the Health Care Inspectorate than the largely
unregistered GPs in Sint Eustatius and Bonaire. Dutch GPs in Sint Eustatius contribute to
improving standards of care. By contrast, the Inspectorate recommends in-service and
refresher training for GPs in Bonaire.
Dutch working practices in mental health care are also finding their way into the organisa-
tion responsible for dependency and psychiatric care in the Caribbean Netherlands (svp-cn)
in Sint Eustatius. In Bonaire, the Health Care Inspectorate expresses high praise for the
fact-team (Flexible Assertive Community Treatment).
Travelling abroad for medical treatment continues to elicit much debate, particularly con-
cerning logistical and bureaucratic procedures. Recently, the Minister of Health, Welfare
and Sport decided on the basis of an international comparison of hospital care in the
region surrounding the Caribbean Netherlands not to make any changes to the ministerial
policy of referring patients travelling abroad for medical treatment to hospitals in Colom-
bia and Guadeloupe.
The following factors appear to be responsible for the improvements:
– The introduction of universal health insurance, with a wide range of medical expenses
being reimbursed;
– Investments in infrastructure and equipment, and using ict to make actions and costs
measurable;
– The influence of the Health Care Inspectorate through its inspections, alerts and rec-
ommendations; the Inspectorate follows health care professionals and institutions
much more closely than in the Netherlands;
– Transfer of knowledge, skills and standards by Dutch professionals working on the
islands, and also increasing deployment of Dutch professionals.
321 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
