Some of these factors were agreed in advance (introduction of health insurance, invest-
ments in buildings and equipment), but some developed only after 10 October 2010, espe-
cially the transfer of medical and nursing knowledge from the Netherlands.
The flipside of the improvements in the level of facilities and the associated increased use
of care is that the costs have risen sharply. This increase became visible in the second half
of 2012. The view from the Netherlands was that this made restrictions in the expenses
reimbursed inevitable, but this has met with a great deal of resistance on the islands.
3 Social security
A key question with regard to social security is what constitutes a level of facilities that is
‘acceptable within the Netherlands’ for the Caribbean Netherlands. Differing circumstances
in the Caribbean context are evidently so marked that adopting the Dutch system was not
considered. This applies in particular for benefit levels. By contrast, elements relating to
the functioning of the system, such as indexation of benefits and the role of the statutory
minimum wage, were adopted. The transition to the Caribbean Netherlands was achieved
through a simple amendment of existing Netherlands Antilles legislation. Although the
intention was expressed of gradually replacing this old legislation with new rules, more
akin to those applying in the Netherlands, no details given on which elements would need
to be amended and within what period.
The fairly broad formulation of the agreements readily leads to differences of expectation
or even misunderstandings between the actors involved. Differences in the interpretation
of the agreements also lead to confusion between central government and the island
administrations. For example, the addendum to the multi-year programme for Bonaire
states that the Kingdom rejects a comparable social security system, whereas the island
administrators consider this unacceptable, referring to the agreement concerning ‘a level
of facilities that is acceptable within the Netherlands’. This lack of clarity may also have
influenced public perceptions of the level of facilities. The public may have assumed that
this would match the facilities in the Netherlands, but were also confronted with the
exceptions owing to the specific situation in the Caribbean Netherlands. The National
Office for the Caribbean Netherlands (rcn) reports the following in this regard:
The differences in the legislative and regulatory framework between the European and Caribbean
Netherlands lead to general dissatisfaction, not only among civil servants, but also among other resi-
dents and administrators of islands who in some cases feel disadvantaged. It is unclear for many peo-
ple why and on which points a distinction is made.
Striking a balance between moving towards the situation in the Netherlands and taking
account of the specific circumstances on the islands is apparently more of an issue in the
field of labour and social security than in other areas. The legislation on the islands differs
markedly from that in the European Netherlands, and that is not entirely without reason:
there are clear differences in the economic circumstances and the labour markets between
322 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
