the two parts of the Kingdom. In the European Netherlands, efforts have been made in
recent decades to strike a good balance between income protection and (re)integration in
the labour process. The high benefit volumes from the past have led to a belief that too
much income protection can exacerbate poverty because people have two little incentive
to provide for their own income. It appears that this principle has also been applied in the
Caribbean Netherlands; benefits are low because of the assumed pull effects and lack of
incentives to work. However, poverty is also high among groups which are not expected to
participate in the labour market, such as the elderly and people with an incapacity for
work, for whom an incentive function is not required. The attention given to poverty and
the economic situation on the islands in various policy documents suggests that a level
that is acceptable within the Netherlands has not yet been reached in this area. Efforts to
combat the socio-economic problems are currently channelled mainly through ‘integrated
projects’, which are set up locally and for which the central government of the Kingdom
contributes over €2 million per year. There is reasonable satisfaction with the implementa-
tion and results of these projects.
The seriousness of the poverty problem in the Caribbean Netherlands is now recognised,
as evidenced among other things by the attention devoted to it in the multi-year plan for
the three islands. One important finding is that there is a virtual absence of the objective
data needed for policy on purchasing power and poverty and the incentives to work in the
social security system. Raising the minimum wage and the linked benefits needs to be
based on the economic capacity of the islands. The Ministry of Social Affairs and Employ-
ment believes that insufficient information is currently available on this.
4 Public safety
It is important to note that the agreements made in 2008 relate only to the nature and
extent of safety provisions. No performance targets were agreed on things such as the
crime clear-up rate, emergency service response times or the percentage of cases dropped
by the public prosecution service. The agreements made also say nothing about the extent
to which the agreed levels of quality and quantity are sufficient to achieve the desired level
of safety. Not only that, but it is also unclear precisely what the level of ambition is for the
Caribbean Netherlands with regard to public safety. As stated, however, there are profes-
sionals who consider the current level of safety provisions to be inadequate on several
points. For example, the size of the local police force (kcpn) has not grown since the transi-
tion to keep pace with the substantial increase in the population, especially in Bonaire. The
investigative capacity is very limited, especially in the Saba and Sint Eustatius. Also, to the
extent that we were able to ascertain this, there is a lack of the legislation and regulations
needed for effective action (juvenile crime, traffic offences).
Nonetheless, again in so far as we were able to ascertain, the Netherlands has complied
with the administrative agreements made in 2008. The minimum agreed staffing level for
the Caribbean police service (kpcn) has been consistently met. The Royal Netherlands Mili-
323 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
