tary Constabulary still makes capacity available to the kpcn, especially investigative
capacity. The police accommodation has improved: the police stations in Saba and Sint
Eustatius have been renovated and in 2014 a new headquarter was opened in Bonaire. The
kpcn works in partnership with the police force in the Dutch province of Brabant. The kpcn
budget has almost doubled from 7 million to 13 million euros, enabling the police to pur-
chase new equipment. In early 2015 the green light was given for the construction of a
completely new prison in Bonaire. The Caribbean Netherlands probation service (Stichting
Reclassering Caribisch Nederland) has five staff based in Bonaire and one person who com-
mutes between the Saba and Sint Eustatius. The public prosecution service on the islands
has grown gradually since the transition, and has been fully staffed since 2012.
Although the agreed investments in safety provisions have been met, as stated earlier
numerous commentators have concerns about public safety on the islands. The crime rate
has also shown no improvement since the transition, although these figures are not always
entirely reliable.
We can conclude that, despite considerable investments by the Netherlands in improving
safety (provisions) in the Caribbean Netherlands, actual safety on the islands has not
improved. How is this possible? It is plausible that the large number of major changes
made within a very short space of time since the transition have taken up a lot of the
energy of the various organisations involved. Extra courses that staff have to follow to
learn new skills take up a great deal of time. In addition, again because of cultural prob-
lems, the learning capacity of the islands’ police service (kpcn) is relatively low, which slows
down the implementation of newly learned practices. The rotation of staff is also widely
seen as a problem, because it leads to loss of know-how and skills. Finally, the artificial
administrative division between Windward and Leeward Islands has led to many practical
problems. Saba and Sint Eustatius, which were previously dependent on the neighbouring
island of St Maarten for many areas related to public safety, have since 10 October 2010
suddenly had to turn to the distant Bonaire. This gives rise to all manner of problems, for
example in carrying out sentences, placing an additional burden on the entire public safety
chain.
All in all, the conclusion is that, although the Netherlands has met its commitments since
the transition and has invested a great deal in the public safety infrastructure in the Carib-
bean Netherlands, the factors mentioned above mean that this has not led to a reduction
in crime rates and an improvement in public safety on the islands.
Consequences of the transition in the eyes of the island populations
An important part of the study to determine the consequences of the transition for the
population are the perceptions of citizens themselves. The opinion survey we carried out
provides a broad picture of public views on the level of facilities achieved since the transi-
tion. To gain a deeper insight, focus groups were also organised on the islands, which fol-
324 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
