Figure S.4
How satisfied are you with the administration (average score out of 10)
10
9
8
7
6.5
6.3
5.9
6
5.4
5.2 5.2
4.9
4.7
5
4.5
4
3
2
1
0
Bonaire St. Eustatius Saba
the administration on the National Oce the government in 
your island for the Caribbean the Netherlands (The Hague)
Netherlands (RCN)
Source: Curconsult (bcn’15) scp treatment
The figures show that the National Office for the Caribbean Netherlands (rcn) performs
relatively the best and the government in The Hague the worst. The local administration
sits in between the two. This is the case on all the islands. The residents of Sint Eustatius
are the most negative and those in Saba are by some margin the least negative, with resi-
dents of Bonaire occupying an intermediate position. The relatively positive views on the
rcn are probably related to the favourable public opinion about the advances that have
been made since the transition in health care and education. There is support for this sup-
position in the open responses about the performance of the administration, in which
respondents agree that the Netherlands is doing its best with health care and education, in
particular, but that the government in The Hague does not really listen to the islands. Or
perhaps the government listens and understands perfectly well, but then does nothing.
Here, the respondents are referring mainly to the socioeconomic situation, which over-
shadows the advances in the other areas. Island residents also believe that there is a wide
difference in mentality, for example about the pace of change and rules, and that Dutch
people have difficulty adapting to the situation and reality on the islands. The focus group
discussions also revealed a less than rosy picture of the government in The Hague. In par-
ticular, it is accused of a lack of empathy and of imposing rules that do not fit the local
situation. The civil servants (ministries) and politicians in The Hague often have an inade-
quate understanding of or ability to empathise with the local reality, local problems and
local challenges. One participant in the focus groups did however perceive greater engage-
ment by (some members of) the Dutch Parliament, something that is appreciated.
329 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
