The local administration also performs poorly in the eyes of island residents. Some focus
group members felt that local administrators do not take their responsibilities, for example
for social housing, and that a lack of capacity and capability means they make insufficient
use of the funds that are available in The Hague. There is a general impression that the
local administration is perhaps doing its best, but in the eyes of the population still does
too little.
What do these findings mean for daily life on the islands? In the opinion survey, residents
were asked how happy they are now, taking everything together. They could indicate this
by giving a score on a scale ranging from 0 (very unhappy) to 10 (very happy). The scores
reveal a rather negative picture about how happy island residents feel. The inhabitants of
Sint Eustatius give roundly negative scores: some 64% feel fairly unhappy with the current
situation (a score of 5 or less), and only 7% feel happy (a score of 8 or higher). Residents of
Saba feel slightly happier with the situation on their island: around 41% are fairly happy
and 15% are happy. Residents of Bonaire art slightly happier with life on their island than
their Saban counterparts, with around 24% feeling fairly unhappy and 15% being happy.
If we look at the average scores, the residents of Bonaire and Saba just barely record ‘satis-
factory’ scores (6 or more), but the scores for Sint Eustatius fall well short of this. The aver-
age scores turn out at 6.2 (Bonaire), 5.9 (Saba) and 4.8 (Sint Eustatius). These are low
scores by Dutch standards: residents of the Netherlands generally score their life satisfac-
tion at just under 8, and 85% of Dutch citizens say that they are happy or very happy.
Perceptions of the social situation on the islands by citizens, professionals, civil servants
and administrators: the story behind the figures
The researchers spoke to citizens, administrators, civil servants, members of the business
community, representatives of civil-society organisations and professionals on the three
islands about the social situation on the islands and the changes that have taken place
since the administrative transition. A total of 60 group and individual interviews were held
with more than 150 professionals and stakeholders, and six drop-in sessions were held in
which the researchers spoke to around 100 citizens. The questions in these interviews were
aimed at uncovering the story behind the figures. The discussions focused on the situation
before the transition, the changes that were to take place, the expectations that people
had of those changes, what went well and what did not, what role the various parties
played in the process, the biggest (continuing) problem areas and the expectations for the
future. In addition to these questions, administrators were also asked for their views on
what constitutes a level of facilities that is acceptable within the Netherlands, the specific
circumstances which need to be taken into account, and the relationship between local
tasks and central government tasks in relation to the priority areas.
330 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
