In the report ten themes are described:
– Economic developments since 10 October 2010;
– Direct social consequences of poverty;
– Relations with the Netherlands (‘us/them’);
– Youth and family;
– Social security;
– Health and (health) care;
– Education;
– Language;
– Infrastructure;
– Crime and safety.
Here we present the most frequently reported findings. This is a summary of the percep-
tions and opinions of the respondents, with no analysis being performed by the research-
ers. For many themes, there is relatively little difference between the way in which citizens
and professionals on the one hand and administrators on the other view the problems and
developments on the islands. For a few themes, however (health care, opinions on the
local administration), clear differences emerged. It should be borne in mind that many resi-
dents wear several hats, for example being both members of the island council and entre-
preneurs, and of course also residents of the island.
The interviewees appear to attribute many of the problems to the transition on 10 October
2010. In reality, however, social problems existed long before then. The population of the
islands has always had a low average education level, poverty also existed previously, as
well as parenting problems, largely absent fathers, limited transport facilities, problems
associated with the small scale of the islands, and so on. What the transition does appear
to have done is to throw all of this into sharper relief, partly due to high expectations.
Social consequences of weak economic position of households
The weak economic situation and even poverty of many households has a range of social
consequences. Many residents feel that their social situation has deteriorated in virtually
all areas since 10 October 2010, and this view is affirmed by social and care professionals.
Poverty and social problems also existed before 10 October 2010, but the situation has got
worse since then. Many citizens are uncertain what the future will bring, and whether
things will ever improve on their island. The researchers also encountered a good deal of
dissatisfaction and anger directed towards the Netherlands, which in the eyes of residents
leaves the Caribbean Netherlands socially and economically in the cold and is unwilling to
recognise the great need that exists in a substantial proportion of the population. This
view is broadly shared, including by professionals and administrators, and was expressed
on all three islands.
331 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
