High cost of living
It is often not possible for a household to live from one salary because of the high cost of
living. This was reported not just by citizens, but also by many professionals and adminis-
trators. Prices in the shops have risen sharply. The costs of utilities have also increased,
partly due to investments by the Netherlands (mains water network in Sint Eustatius, sew-
age system in Bonaire, waste incineration facilities on all islands). Some island residents
therefore have multiple jobs and try to generate income in all kinds of ways. In addition to
their paid employment, many people start their own small business or try to rent out
apartments (especially older people with their own home). There is almost no saving. Older
people are making increasing use of food banks.
Problems with young people and in families
Care and education professionals are concerned that the many hours that parents have to
work mean they are devoting less or even too little attention to their children, leading to
parenting problems and sometimes to juvenile crime. Young people spend much of their
time on the streets and effectively bring themselves up. Since the task of parenting falls
almost entirely on the shoulders of the mothers, they have a particularly full existence and
experience the most poverty. Lack of money means children have few toys, something that
is harmful for their development. There are growing concerns about the number of chil-
dren going to school without having had breakfast.
Debts
People are borrowing money from each other much more frequently; according to support
professionals, there are few households which do not have debts. This regularly leads to
problems if repayments are not made or not made on time. Partly because of this debt
problem, there is great dependence on neighbours and family, which can jeopardise the
social cohesion of these small communities. Older people, single mothers and the chroni-
cally ill and disabled, in particular, are often dependent on family and friends because the
social security benefits (old-age pension and/or social assistance benefit) are not enough
to live on. Social assistance benefit is in reality intended for people with disabilities, a
group for whom there are specific provisions in the Netherlands. These groups are at a far
remove from the labour market and have few opportunities to earn money themselves.
Although there is a debt counselling system on the islands, this is not regulated by legisla-
tion as it is in the Netherlands.
Women and children in a vulnerable position
Young single mothers remain living with their parents; grandparents share their home with
their children and grandchildren. Fathers are often absent and take little or no responsibil-
ity for their children. Although this situation was reported on all three islands, Sint Eusta-
tius stands out negatively: 80% of children on this island grow up in single-parent families.
332 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
