Citizens complain that housing costs have risen sharply and are difficult for many people to
afford. The amount of social housing is very limited, and also too expensive for many. The
social housing sector is also facing difficulties and has too few resources to maintain the
existing stock. There is also no rent benefit to help reduce the housing costs for occupants.
To mitigate the living costs, several family generations therefore live together in housing
that is often too small. Partly because of this, and also due to the severe socio-economic
problems, there are many tensions within households and domestic violence, sexual vio-
lence and incest are rife. Although these are not issues that people find easy to talk about,
health care, education and police professionals express their views very clearly: women
and children are in a vulnerable position.
Perceived increase in crime
Citizens on all three islands believe that crime rates have increased in recent years, espe-
cially petty crime such as theft. There has been a striking increase in theft of basic necessi-
ties, such as food and clothing, perhaps suggesting that crime is used a survival strategy.
The willingness to report offences is generally low. Everyone knows everyone, people are
related to or acquainted with each other and are therefore often inclined to look the other
way. This does little to foster social cohesion on the islands.
Social problems spread to schools
The social problems at home do not remain confined to the household. Parental stress due
to unemployment, poverty and lack of future prospects also has an impact on the children,
who take the problems with them to school. There is a lot of aggression and unrest within
schools, teachers report that the number of pupils with special needs is disconcertingly
high and, taken together with the language difficulties, that impacts on learning outcomes.
The nature and extent of the problems means that teaching is often very stressful.
High transport costs
The residents of Saba and Sint Eustatius are dependent on a single airline (Winair) if they
wish to travel off the islands, and ticket prices, including surcharges and taxes, are very
high. As a consequence, many people virtually no longer leave their island. Shopping in
Sint Maarten is no longer an option for many people.
High food prices, unhealthy dietary habits
Food prices are exceptionally high. Fresh products are unaffordable for many people,
partly because little or no fruit and vegetables are grown on the islands themselves. People
tend to eat a very one-sided, high-calorie diet (lots of fat and carbohydrates) which is
poorly balanced. These poor dietary habits are leading to a growing number of people who
are overweight or obese and of associated disorders such as diabetes, cardiovascular dis-
ease and joint problems. Care consumption on the islands is relatively high. Many people
can no longer afford to pay medical costs that are not covered by the basic insurance sys-
tem. Since 1 January 2015, dentistry and physiotherapy are no longer reimbursed by the
333 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
