basic health insurance. As people are unable to take out additional insurance, there is a
danger of public health problems developing. Care professionals are also disturbed by this.
Differences between islands
The social consequences of poverty are visible on all islands. It is not possible to say
whether there is a different in the severity of the problems between the islands. The more
isolated location and smaller size of Saba and Sint Eustatius makes it more difficult for resi-
dents of these islands to escape from poverty than for their counterparts in Bonaire. The
labour market is small on these islands, the economic structure is vulnerable and alterna-
tive sources of income are difficult to find. The social problems, especially for children and
adolescents, are felt to be relatively most serious in Sint Eustatius, where children’s rights
appear to be frequently violated. For example, the dominant sexual mores are harmful for
children, and according to both citizens and professionals, child prostitution has increased
in recent years. There appears to be more silent poverty in Saba, which does not mean that
there is less poverty. On the other hand, the negative sentiment towards the Netherlands is
stronger in Bonaire then on the other two islands.
Concluding discussion
The picture that emerges from this report is mixed, with both positive and negative
aspects. Great progress has been made in some areas of government provision, but socio-
economically the situation on the islands has deteriorated significantly. Living costs in par-
ticular have risen sharply; this has a major impact on the daily lives of residents, and has
given rise to new social problems and exacerbated existing social problems. The deteriora-
tion in the socioeconomic situation overshadows, both in fact and in the perception of res-
idents, the good progress made in the areas of health care, education and public safety. It
is striking that opinions in 2015 about what has been achieved are more negative than two
years ago. Poverty and the struggle to survive on the islands imposes such a heavy burden
on people’s daily lives that it appears to blind them to what has been achieved. Island resi-
dents accordingly rate the lives they lead with poor or moderate scores: just barely ‘satis-
factory’ in the eyes of residents of Bonaire and Saba, but unsatisfactory for residents of
Sint Eustatius. Compared with the ratings that citizens elsewhere and in the European
Netherlands give for their daily lives, these are worrying figures.
The causes of the deterioration in the socioeconomic situation can be traced only partially
to the administrative transition that took place on 10 October 2010. The problems with
young people and parenting have always been greater on the islands than on the Dutch
mainland, as has the scale of poverty. But these problems have been thrown into sharp
relief, particularly by the steep drop in purchasing power after 10 October 2010. The intro-
duction of the us dollar on 1 January 2011 and the more rigorous collection of taxes are
cited as the reasons for the downturn in purchasing power, but in reality they don’t ade-
quately explain the extent of the reduction. External factors, such as the trend in world
334 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
