food and energy prices, also play a part. Opinions diverge about the causes of the reduc-
tion in purchasing power, and the fact that those causes have not been properly studied
exacerbates this. Sometimes blame is laid at the door of the Netherlands because of the
changes in taxes and tax collection and the introduction of the us dollar; sometimes the
finger is pointed at local politicians and their failure to respond adequately to the price
increases; and sometimes other factors are cited, such as the lack of economic develop-
ment or the islands’ geographical isolation. There is in reality an interplay of factors at
work, and it is too simplistic to ascribe the deterioration in purchasing power to the conse-
quences of the administrative transition. The purported role of entrepreneurs and the
business community on the islands should also be mentioned here: they raised their prices
when the us dollar was introduced. The sharp rise in food and oil prices on the world mar-
ket is also a contributory factor.
The consequences of the deterioration in the socioeconomic situation are worrying. Pov-
erty has spread rapidly and reached high levels. This has contributed to an increase in
crime, domestic violence, sexual violence against women and children, overcrowded hous-
ing and lack of hope. Poverty explains the social problems, but can of course never justify
them; residents have their own responsibility here, and it is not enough simply to point an
accusing finger at others, especially the Netherlands.
While it is true that on paper the island administrators have primary responsibility for com-
bating poverty and for employment, important policy instruments are in reality in the
hands of the Dutch government, which has stuck closely to the principle of legislative reti-
cence in these areas. The conditionally promised improvements in social security have not
yet been achieved. It is possible to question the wisdom of sustaining a system which falls
so far short of the Dutch system, thereby forcing large sections of the population to live
below the subsistence minimum. The social consequences of poverty impact on all the
other priority areas, especially health care, education and public safety, but also on social
cohesion on the islands.
This report focused on the situation in relation to five priority areas, within the context of
the prevailing economic situation. However, it became clear during the study that the sit-
uation in four domains helps determine the outcomes achieved in the priority areas. We
are referring here to the consequences of poverty, the situation in relation to youth and
family, the language issue and the administrative relations. Poverty on the islands has led
to an increase in the social problems within families. Parents are more often working two
jobs, and therefore devote less attention to their children. This in turn leads to more
domestic violence, more complex problems at school, more crime, etc..
The language issue also affects all the priority policy areas. Discrepancies between the lan-
guage used at home and the language of instruction and examinations at school put chil-
dren at an educational disadvantage. Language can also lead to communication problems
335 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
