when patients travel abroad for medical treatment, and can lead to problems with the
police and in judicial matters, where Dutch is the official language.
Finally, the functioning of the local and Dutch administrations helps to determine the social
and economic outcomes. Both citizens and professionals are fiercely critical, not just of the
Dutch administration, but also of their own local administration, which they accuse of fall-
ing short on a number of points or being too indecisive. Citizens also refer to nepotism and
a democratic deficit, which in the last elections was reflected among other things in a large
number of bought votes.
The islands are confronted with special circumstances and a weak starting situation for the
transition. Those special circumstances, such as their small size, geographic isolation,
heavy dependence on imports, low education level of the population, economic vulnera-
bility, relatively weak governance, lack of continuity in senior management positions, the
vulnerable position of children and the large number of single-parent families, make the
islands and their residents exceptionally vulnerable. Those circumstances have not
changed simply because the islands have become a special part of the Netherlands.
The documents show that the configuration and development of facilities generally do not
explicitly take into account the potentially important special circumstances, and often fall
back on formulations as set out in the Statute for the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Whether and to what extent certain circumstances play a role in practice in achieving a
level of facilities that is acceptable within the Netherlands is considered to only a limited
degree.
Before the transition it was agreed that the aim should be to achieve a ‘level of facilities
that is acceptable within the Netherlands’ on all three islands, which is appropriate in the
region, reflects the islands’ integration into the Dutch state system and is appropriate for
the island residents. From our interviews it is evident that this starting point created differ-
ent expectations, and proved to be fairly unworkable in practice. The agreements which
stemmed from this principle are sometimes very modest and sometimes dynamic. In the
area of social security, the aims were very modest; the Netherlands was more dynamic in
configuring the public safety facilities, and even more so with regard to education and
health care. However, it is not clear from the documents studied what prompted these dif-
ferences in dynamism. No overall vision was developed regarding the level of facilities to
be achieved. The agreements made were very much driven by individual ministries, with
no integrated plan or approach to the development of the Caribbean Netherlands. Each
ministry brought forward its own ideas, plans and budgets for the islands. The islands had
to consult on these with the individual ministries, but also had no central point of contact
themselves, in the way that the Association of Netherlands Municipalities (vng) functions
as a contact point for municipalities in the European Netherlands. A ‘cn week’ is held annu-
ally, in which (representatives of) island administrations consult with the different minis-
336 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
