tries in The Hague in order to formulate a broad agenda for the further development of the
islands, but in these consultations, too, the main focus is on the individual ministerial per-
spectives.
The island residents had high expectations – perhaps too high in the view of the European
Netherlands. The transition failed to match those expectations sufficiently. That is due first
and foremost to the existing lack of prosperity and the limited role assumed by the Euro-
pean Netherlands in the socioeconomic development of the islands. Although residents
love their islands, they have become more sombre in recent years. The opinion surveys
show that public opinion on developments since the transition, as well as the expectations
for the next five years, have turned much more negative on all three islands. The negative
sentiment is gaining more and more ground, including with respect to the Netherlands. It is
not only residents, but also professionals working in the priority areas who are critical of
the Netherlands, particularly as regards the socioeconomic situation. They are disappoin-
ted about what they see as a failure by the Netherlands to understand the critical situation
on the islands. This occasionally leads to calls for more independence for the islands, both
relative to the Netherlands and to each other. At the same time, there is a realisation that
the islands will never be able to be entirely independent. The Netherlands is financially
necessary, because the islands receive considerably more financial support from the Neth-
erlands than they raise from their own resources.
This brings us to the final question: has what was agreed been achieved? In the areas of
health care, education, public safety and infrastructure, a great deal has been achieved.
There are still some areas of concern, but these are due mainly to the specific circumstan-
ces on the islands, such as language and pupils with special needs, medical treatments
abroad and the availability of dentistry care, the high turnover of teaching staff, medical
professionals and civil servants, and the brain drain as young people leave the islands to
enter higher education elsewhere. Socio economically, however, a great deal remains to be
done.
The socioeconomic malaise does much to negate the progress in the other areas. If poverty
is reduced, the social problems will also ease. This in turn will place the results achieved in
the areas of health care, education, public safety and infrastructure in a better light. That
would also increase the confidence of citizens, professionals and administrators on the
islands, and therefore help open up the prospect of a better future. The multi-year pro-
gramme for the Caribbean Netherlands for the period 2014-2016, which was adopted in
June 2015, offers a good starting point for this. Under this programme, the local adminis-
tration and the government in The Hague will work together to combat poverty, improve
the economic situation and respect children’s rights.
337 s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
