-    
Executive Summary 
This document is the final report on the evaluation of cooperation programmes implemented by “Stichting 
Ontwikkeling Nederlandse Antillen” (hereinafter: SONA) during the period from 2008 to 2014 in Bonaire, Sint 
Eustatius and Saba. PwC performed this evaluation in the period March - October 2015. PwC also performed an 
evaluation into cooperation programmes for Curaçao and Sint Maarten. This evaluation was commissioned by 
the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations (hereinafter: BZK). 
Main message 
During the period 2008 – 2014, SONA funds were used to implement 94 projects in the Caribbean Netherlands: 
53 on Bonaire, 19 on Sint Eustatius and 22 on Saba. Activities performed during these projects had a positive 
impact on the development of the islands. Saba used the cooperation programmes in a very effective manner; this 
was less so on Bonaire and Sint Eustatius as far as the IVB programme is concerned. The objectives of the IVB 
cooperation programme, which where formulated in 2008, proved to be ambitious for Bonaire and Sint Eustatius. 
This can partly be attributed to becoming part of the Netherlands, which took time and effort for executive 
councils on the islands. Nevertheless, the SONA cooperation programmes helped them to develop their island 
and to maintain the course they had plotted. It is up to the Netherlands, the executive councils on these islands 
and all their citizens to continue following this course in the future. 
Background of SONA 
By establishing SONA in 2004, the Netherlands and the former Netherlands Antilles (later the countries of 
Curaçao and Sint Maarten and the public entities Saba, Sint Eustatius and Bonaire) distanced the management 
of cooperation funds, and the selection and monitoring of projects, from their own governments. By doing so, 
they complied with the main recommendations of the Werkgroep Wijers in 2002: this distance could further 
improve the effectiveness of cooperation, and bureaucracy and direct political interference could be minimised. 
The Netherlands funded the cooperation programmes based on a management agreement with SONA, whereby 
the former Netherlands Antilles (later the countries Curaçao and Sint Maarten and the public bodies Saba, Sint 
Eustatius and Bonaire) could submit project proposals which would be assessed and awarded (or not) by the 
Executive organisation SONA (hereinafter: USONA). The Netherlands made the last payment to SONA at the 
end of 2012. In total, the Netherlands paid ANG 60.3 million (approximately €30.1 million) to SONA, which 
benefited public entities in Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba. The cooperation programmes were brought to an 
end in 2014. 
Three cooperation programmes 
The cooperation funds are divided into three programmes: Institutional Strengthening and Reinforcement 
(hereinafter: IVB), Education and Youth Cooperation (hereinafter: OJSP) and Social Economic Initiative 
(hereinafter: SEI). The main objectives of these programmes were (in short): 
 IVB OJSP SEI 
Bonaire The political relationship that The policy is consistent with A development goal in six policy 
Bonaire wants to maintain with development policy because it focuses areas: 
the Netherlands has implications on backlogs and raises the general level 1. Development and Spatial Planning; 
for the roles and responsibilities of of education. If more equitable access to 2. Reactivation neighbourhoods; 
the Executive Council, and for quality education is provided, this 3. Infrastructure; 
management and good should improve the competitive 4. Regulatory and investment 
governance. position of Bonaire and, besides climate; 
focusing on the Kingdom and Europe, 5. Labour market and training; 
improve focus on the region and the 6. Tourism. 
United States. 
Sint The goal of the IVB is to strengthen To better equip the youth of Sint A development goal in six policy 
Eustatius the island’s government Eustatius so that, after completing their areas: 
organisations and to prepare for studies, they will be able to participate in 1. Tourism development; 
their new tasks as a public body. the labour market and fully contribute to 2. Small and medium enterprises; 
a constantly changing society, at the 3. Infrastructure and logistics; 
local level, as well as regional and global 4. Spatial planning and nature 
level. conservation. 
  
PwC Pagina 9 van 114
