-    
 IVB OJSP SEI 
Saba The development objective of the To better equip the youth of Saba so that, A development goal in six policy 
IVB Saba is to make sure Saba will after completing their studies, they will areas: 
be sufficiently capable, by herself or be able to participate in the labour 1. Developing tourism; 
with help from other parties, of market and fully contribute to a 2. Upgrading infrastructure; 
addressing policy-related constantly changing society, at the local 3. Public sector; 
challenges, thus resulting in a level, as well as regional and global level. 4. Labour and training; 
strong government entity on Saba. 5. Social issues; 
6. Government Budget. 
 
This evaluation has two objectives: 
 Firstly, it aims to offer the Dutch parliament a global overview about how funding via SONA has 
contributed to pre-defined programme objectives for the cooperation programmes. 
 Secondly, the evaluation aims to make recommendations to public entities of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and 
Saba, about how improvements initiated by the cooperation programmes should be preserved and 
sustained. 
Results 
The research questions in this evaluation involve four themes: the effectiveness, sustainability, efficiency and 
impact of the three cooperation programmes. The research method for the evaluation has been described in 
paragraph 1.4 of this report and fully elaborated in Annex C. At the beginning of chapters 3 (effectiveness), 4 
(sustainability), 5 (efficiency) and 6 (impact), a brief explanation has been provided about how we answered each 
research question. 
Conclusions  
Based on activities carried out in all 94 projects, an in-depth examination of the ten projects as well as interim 
and final reports for each programme, we can conclude the following about the effectiveness of the cooperation 
programmes: 
1. Programme goals are aimed at realising a social impact, which has been manifested in a broad and 
comprehensive manner. Programme objectives have been described in ambitious and abstract terms. 
Given the direction Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba have chosen as of October 10, 2010, namely as public 
bodies within the Netherlands, the targets are realistic and clearly compatible with the planned transition. 
In this case, the role and relationship with the Dutch government has been considered: the public bodies 
could expect the Netherlands to play a clear role at administrative. education and socio-economic level. It 
is worth mentioning that the feasibility of the cooperation programmes was not tested before they were 
agreed and carried out by Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba. Beforehand it was unclear whether 
implementing all projects within a cooperation programme would lead to programme objectives being 
realised. 
2. Project proposals reflect the project’s contribution to the social effects identified within the cooperation 
programme. The assessment by USONA involved assessing the feasibility of project proposals. The 
relationship between project objectives, results and activities in project proposals was then – partly via the 
intervention of USONA – strengthened and activities performed within the project were further specified. 
The intervention logic was confirmed in financing agreements between SONA and the public entities. This 
helped to increase the project’s potential impact on society, while also focusing attention on realising 
activities defined in the financing agreement. 
3. The final reports show that over 80% of the planned activities were realised in the majority of the projects. 
In this sense, the projects also made a positive contribution to programme objectives. The table below 
shows the extent to which activities in projects were realised for each cooperation programme: 
Realisation of planned activities within IVB OJSP SEI All projects 
a project >80% 
Bonaire 55% 60% 92% 81% 
Sint Eustatius 60% 25% 60% 53% 
Saba 100% 100% 100% 100% 
  
PwC Pagina 10 van 114
