-    
All projects on Saba realised over 80% of the planned activities. Saba appears to have set realistic project 
proposals that could be implemented on time and within budget. It is also striking that a low activity 
realisation rate was realised for OJSP and IVB in Bonaire and Sint Eustatius. This is somewhat 
understandable for OJSP, because the programme was set up for a long period but ended one year after 
investment, when the three islands became public bodies subject to Dutch education policy. More 
specifically, we can conclude the following per cooperation programme: 
a. All planned activities in the three IVB projects were carried out on Saba. The island has thus 
strengthened its administrative power.  
Over 80% of the intended activities were carried out in seven of the eleven IVB projects on Bonaire; 
this was between 50% and 80% in four of the projects. Over 80% of activities were implemented in 
three of the five IVB projects on Sint Eustatius, and between 50-80% in the other two projects. These 
activities had a positive impact on the objectives of the programme, but also showed that Bonaire 
and Sint Eustatius failed to meet all their objectives. Financial management is one area of policy 
where objectives have not been met. Bonaire introduced a management model with help from 
external consultants, implemented a development plan and a plan for human resource development, 
but the new set-up at Public Body Bonaire is not yet functioning as intended. This is due to the 
limited availability of suitable candidates for vacancies and insufficient budget to fill all vacancies. 
The competencies of management teams and the board have developed, thus reinforcing the 
management model and strengthening internal organisation. It is worth mentioning that many 
internal and external stakeholders are dissatisfied with the effectiveness of the management model. 
Specific laws and regulations were passed in 2011 (WolBES) and the island council examined and 
approved 272 schemes.  
The IVB projects on Sint Eustatius were more limited in scope and involved one-year technical 
assistance for the Finance Department; and a one-year secondment assignment, involving an official 
from a Dutch municipality, to serve as Island Secretary and improve Planning Agency Statia for the 
implementation of SEI projects. Sint Eustatius also invested in IT and communication systems for 
the government. Considering the structural shortage of human resources in key functions and major 
financial problems faced by Sint Eustatius, the investment was insufficient to realise the very 
ambitious objectives of Sint Eustatius. 
b. SEI projects on Saba achieved the intended results. The administrative office has been renovated 
and extended. A strategic plan was developed for the tourism industry and the centre of ‘The Bottom’ 
was decorated with new lampposts. The port area has been improved by constructing a quay wall 
and a retaining wall, and by constructing a fisher’s warehouse and port office. A vocational school 
has been renovated, three blocks for social housing were completed in 2012 and an incinerator was 
purchased. These results have made a positive contribution to the objectives of the programme. 
c. The same also applies to Bonaire. In terms of SEI Bonaire, all intended results in development and 
planning policy were realised by creating a Spatial Development Plan, a vision for the town centre 
and a housing plan for the Public Body. A boost was also given to the reputation of Bonaire as a 
sustainable destination. The return on investment for pilot projects, aimed at guiding people to the 
labour market, turned out to be very low. A third of the SEI budget was invested in infrastructure 
improvements like the boulevard, roundabouts and divers. Projects were implemented to improve 
the quality of life in neighbourhoods by renovating sports facilities, building playgrounds and 
squares, renovating a community centre and refurbishing 85 social housing dwellings. 
d. After major reprioritisation in 2010, focus of the SEI on Sint Eustatius shifted to improving the 
island’s port area. The planned activities were carried out in the port, and intended effects were 
partly realised: the downtime of the port was reduced and there was an increase in the average length 
of stay of boats, while planned investment in the harbour by private parties was disappointing and, 
according to end users, the port has not become any safer. In order to further develop the tourism 
sector, it was necessary to invest in developing a tourism marketing plan and deploying an 
investment officer. The same applied to investments in SME’s. The spatial development plan was 
developed and approved, and is a pre-requisite for further economic growth. A plan for preventing 
  
PwC Pagina 11 van 114
