-    
erosion on the island was also developed. However, during the project, less of the erosion plan was 
carried out than initially intended. The capacity of the landfill site was also improved with the 
purchase of an incinerator and two cars crushers. All in all, the results have been important for 
sustainably improving the population’s socio-economic prospects. 
It is worth mentioning that, based on the realization percentages of project activities, conclusions cannot 
be drawn about the extent to which programme objectives have been realised. 
4. No interim evaluations were carried out for cooperation programmes carried out on the islands. In 
addition, there were no final evaluations or monitoring information for programmes carried out by the 
islands. Therefore, these insights cannot be used to gain an insight into the success of the programmes. 
5. External resources like macro-economic studies and research provide the following insight into the 
extent to which programme objectives have been realised:  
a. In terms of the IVB Programme’s aim to “improve financial management”, the Commission for 
Financial Supervision (Cft) says that Bonaire is expected to realise the necessary improvements by 
the end of 2015. Cft is very concerned about financial management on Sint Eustatius, while financial 
management on Saba has improved whereby a fully-approved statement of accounts is almost within 
reach. We were unable to find any relevant reports concerning the other two programme aims. 
b. The OJSP programme was a four-year programme which ended after one year in 2009, when the 
Dutch Ministry of Education became responsible for education. Reports by the Dutch School 
Inspectorate, about educational improvements, place greater emphasis on the effectiveness of 
investment in education after 2009 than the effectiveness of the one-year investment in the 2008 
budget. 
c. In terms of the SEI, we found so few figures that we cannot draw any conclusions about 
developments in the programme period 2008 – 2012. 
d. Bearing in mind the limitations above, the figures state the following about programme objectives 
being realised: 
 Bonaire Sint Eustatius Saba 
IVB - - 0 
OJSP 0 - 0 
SEI 0 - + 
 
+ : Studies show a positive development in realising programme objectives 
0 : Studies show a neutral development in realising programme objectives 
- : Studies show a negative development in realising programme objectives 
 
Based on the in-depth analysis of ten selected projects, we conclude the following about the sustainability of the 
cooperation programmes: 
1. When determining or approving the budget for the three cooperation programmes on the islands in the 
Caribbean Netherlands, limited consideration was given to the size of the submitted budget in relation to 
the annual budget of the public entities, particularly in relation to Sint Eustatius and Bonaire. The relatively 
large investments in infrastructure for ports and roads, sports facilities and public housing put great 
pressure on the budgets of the public bodies. To illustrate: the overall level of cooperation on Bonaire 
constituted approximately 58% of Bonaire’s total budget in 2012. For Sint Eustatius, this figure was 125%. 
Financial sustainability, or structural measures for maintaining and managing the impact of projects on 
the islands’ budgets, could have been an issue in advance. We were not convinced that financial 
sustainability was realised in seven of the ten projects examined during our in-depth research. Two of the 
three projects where we thought financial sustainability had been realised were located on Saba. 
  
PwC Pagina 12 van 114
