-    
2. There is a mixed outlook when it comes to institutional embedding of knowledge and experience. When 
the islands worked with people from the government itself, a learning curve could be seen in terms of 
project management experience and policy. This is an important side effect of the cooperation programmes 
and has contributed to institutional sustainability. This was not so much the case when the islands worked 
with external contractors. Saba is an exception, where skills in project management and policy already 
seemed well-developed before the cooperation programmes. In six of the ten projects examined during our 
in-depth research, we were not convinced that institutional sustainability had been sufficiently 
safeguarded. Two of the four projects we deemed as institutionally secured, where projects located on Saba; 
the other two were on Bonaire. 
3. Whether (the results of) projects are embedded into the policies of the public bodies depends on the impact 
of Dutch policy, and thus how it is embedded into the policy of public bodies in the Caribbean Netherlands. 
Based on the in-depth analysis of ten selected projects in Bonaire, St. Eustatius and Saba, we can conclude the 
following about the efficiency of the cooperation programmes: 
1. In terms of deliverables within a project, people and resources were deployed efficiently. This applies to 
projects in all three of the cooperation programmes. There were mixed fortunes concerning the efficiency 
of the more ambitious project objectives (social effect). Most of the projects have achieved a great deal 
considering the available budget (OJSP-project FO Bonaire, SEI-project Extension of the port Saba), while 
not much was achieved in some projects (SEI-project Guidance to the labour market Bonaire).  
2. The fact that most of the ten projects studied in-depth have contributed to programme objectives being 
realised, is partly due to the role played by USONA in supporting the design and implementation of 
projects. 
3. The underlying principle for cooperation programmes is that the public bodies of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius 
and Saba bear responsibility for submitted projects, from writing the proposal to evaluation. The public 
bodies were primarily responsible for ensuring that all proposed projects would help to effectively realise 
the objectives of the cooperation programmes. Reprioritisation took place while the cooperation 
programmes were being implemented. This reprioritisation was aimed at increasing the sustainability, 
efficiency and effectiveness of the programmes and was partly based on the results of interim evaluations. 
The aim was to improve compatibility between projects and policy areas, and to thus achieve higher 
efficiency in the cooperation programmes. 
4. There was a mixed picture concerning the efficiency with which cooperation programmes were 
implemented. The stakeholders – the Dutch government and the public bodies of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius 
and Saba, SONA and its executive organisation USONA – have actively promoted efficient use of funds 
from cooperation programmes by reprioritising and granting extensions. Besides this, none of the 
stakeholders involved in regularly shaping and assessing project proposals visibly intervened in order to 
safeguard the efficiency of cooperation programmes: project proposals were assessed individually, and 
not comparatively, and normally in the order they were received. This method complies with procedural 
arrangements for the cooperation programmes between the Netherlands, the public entities, SONA and 
USONA. Nevertheless, this has limited the efficiency of the cooperation programmes as a whole. 
Based on a general assessment of effectiveness, an in-depth examination of ten selected projects in Bonaire, Sint 
Eustatius and Saba, and the reports for each programme, we can conclude the following about the impact of the 
cooperation programmes: 
1. Considering the position of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba in 2008 in all thematic areas of cooperation 
programmes, we can conclude that the cooperation programmes have had a positive impact. However, at 
the same time, we can conclude that the objectives of the IVB and SEI in Bonaire and Sint Eustatius were 
partially achieved. Factors to explain this include: 
a. Many projects have been carried out within the cooperation programmes. Managing these projects, 
and financially securing the long-term results, proved to be a major burden for the islands. 
Beforehand, one could have expected this to jeopardise the impact of the cooperation programmes. 
  
PwC Pagina 13 van 114
