-    
b. The islands had limited executive power up to October 10, 2010, but also afterwards as public bodies 
within the Netherlands. The budgets and administration of the public bodies are limited in terms of 
scope and flexibility. Given their size, the islands’ main challenge is to attract enough highly qualified 
personnel. 
c. Policy from the Netherlands only played a role relatively late on. On October 10, 2010 the responsible 
departments in The Hague possessed absolutely no policy-related knowledge (except the Ministry 
of Interior and Kingdom Relations (BZK)). 
d. The measures to be taken in the programmes were identified, but an assessment was not carried out 
in advance to see whether these measures would have the biggest possible impact on programme 
objectives. It is impossible to tell whether the investments would have had more impact if a 
feasibility study had been carried out for the programmes. Programme feasibility was also not 
addressed when monitoring the programmes. 
2. The OJSP programme on Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba was not given the opportunity to realise the 
desired impact because, even before the transition to public bodies, the programme was replaced by the 
Dutch education policy. 
3. We see the previously identified learning curve in project management and the role of policy as a positive 
impact of the cooperation programmes. 
Recommendations for the Netherlands (the central government) 
1. We recommend the Netherlands to establish good agreements with the public entities Bonaire, Sint 
Eustatius and Saba, about mutually dividing administrative and financial responsibilities for sustaining 
the results of cooperation programmes and dividing responsibility for new projects. 
1. We also recommend the Netherlands to be much stricter with the public entities Bonaire and Sint 
Eustatius, in terms of which specific components require government attention (in terms of money and 
manpower). 
2. We have found that, in many cases, it has been very difficult to objectively determine whether a project 
has been successful. At the start of new projects or programmes, we recommend the Netherlands to 
consult with the public entities Bonaire and Sint Eustatius, to make sure that project objectives are 
specific, measurable and realistic. Furthermore, we also recommend performing a baseline assessment 
on indicators used to measure its objectives, so the starting position will be clear. This will allow the 
government to clearly determine whether results are actually are achieved. 
3. We recommend the Netherlands to continue offering support to maintain the skills of people working for 
the public bodies. This will reduce dependency on temporary knowledge and capacity. This can be done 
in consultation with the public entities Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba, by continuing the knowledge 
exchange programmes with Dutch municipalities and other public institutions and by adjusting these 
exchange programmes if necessary. 
4. Project proposals during the cooperation programmes were rated in order of receipt and not assessed 
comparatively. We recommend the Netherlands to consult with the public entities Bonaire, Sint Eustatius 
and Saba so an alternative approach can be found: 
a. Firstly, focus on what is necessary for society on the island. 
b. Then decide what can be financially and institutionally supported by the island itself and whether, 
and to what extent, the Netherlands should actively support policies on the islands. 
c. Thereafter, compile a plan showing how impact on the island can be realised. 
d. Finally, establish the corresponding budget and determine the relative contribution (Netherlands - 
public body). In short, apply the principle “money follows purpose” rather than “purpose follows 
money”.   
  
PwC Pagina 14 van 1
