-    
27
Conclusies uit evaluatie DEO-projecten 
Bonaire 
 ‘The main challenge to the Bonaire government was their ability to fully implement the EDPB 
[Economic Development Program Bonaire, PwC]. The document did not appear to be a ‘living’ product 
that had consistent follow-up, and there was no monitoring. 
 The EDPB was a carefully thought out approach to help spur development, and it will serve as a strong 
basis for the SEI and other future development planning efforts. The constraints confronted by the 
EDPB were in execution and having a common medium term strategy framework that the government, 
as a whole, and the private sector were behind. 
 Economic growth did occur and gains were made in employment and the tourism sector. Bonaire may 
well be poised for a period of continued or accelerated growth in tourism, construction, and population. 
The future challenge is to consolidate the gains and have a more coherent program that meets specific 
targeted objectives and activities. The growth may also cause new issues to arise such as heightened 
environmental concerns, and the need to meet employment demands with appropriately skilled 
residents. And, if infrastructure investment is not aligned with the requirements of harbor 
improvement and Kralendijk growth, economic growth may not reach its potential in the coming years 
of tourism growth. The main economic management issue for Bonaire is not to spur economic growth, 
but to manage the growth that is occurring. 
 The program also was impacted by weak prioritization and competition for funds given the process 
that has evolved for the SED funds [Sustainable Economic Development, PwC]. While Bonaire has 
received more SED funds than Sint Maarten for new project starts (2004-2007), for example, it still did 
not receive the share initially envisioned to support the EDPB. The change of timing of the program 
(October 2004-September 2006- 23 months), using of funds for pre-USONA projects and other 
programs (governance and education), and competition has discouraged use or crowded out program 
funding for economic development. 
 The EDPB or any follow on efforts, such as the SEI, should have a very specific annual program of what 
will be done in a one year time frame and placed within at least an overall 3 year framework with a 
year-by-year budget. The grant program projects should be integrated into a medium term 
expenditure framework to the extent possible.’ 
 
Sint Eustatius 
 ‘Overall the EDP [Economic Development Program Bonaire, PwC] was carefully thought out with the 
objective of creating a foundation for economic growth and development. The constraints confronted 
by Statia were the amount of available funding (external and domestic provided), the limited follow-
up on activities and outputs that did not require funding, and follow-up to some completed projects. 
Regarding SED [Sustainable Economic Development, PwC] funding, limited funding was available for 
new projects and funding for the education sector program overshadowed the SED. 
 The development of indicators and the collection and availability of data is a challenge that must be 
addressed. Future impact of economic development programs and private sector investment must be 
planned and measured using reliable statistical data. 
 Any follow on efforts, such as the SEI, should have a very specific annual program and realistic funding 
levels. Future economic development should consider what could be done given the size and capacity of 
the economy in the short term (1-year) the medium term (3 years) and the long term (7-10 years). The 
grant program projects should be integrated into a rolling 3-year Medium Term Budget and 
Investment Framework (MTBIF) and to the extent possible estimate needs for up to five years.’ 
Saba 
 ‘Saba is in a unique situation for many reasons: 
o Smallest island of the Netherlands Antilles group by land area, population, and size of 
economy; 
                                                             
27
 Bron: BGSI, Evaluation of the Cooperation Program for Sustainable Economic Development 2004-2007, Chapters 5, 6 
and 7: Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba Government Report, Final Report July 2007. De citaten op deze pagina zijn 
letterlijk overgenomen uit de oorspronkelijke, Engelstalige tekst. 
  
PwC Pagina 29 van 114
