-    
o Natural constraints to tourism arrivals due to small runway and daily ferry schedule; 
o Unique tourism ecosystem that includes diving, exceptional hiking trails, and picturesque town 
settings; 
o Medical school that makes major contribution to employment and income, and 
o Challenging infrastructure needs including road maintenance, water collection and delivery, 
and hiking trails maintenance. 
 For these reasons, Saba's economic development roadmap is also different from the other islands, a 
major factor being that economic and tourism growth is likely to see small, if any, year-to-year growth. 
This being said, development of the tourism product and tourism marketing are still important to keep 
the current hotels and guest houses at high occupancy – and thus continued investment is required. 
 Good development planning efforts require not just execution, but also the ability to follow through, 
correct and adjust the course of action based on realities, and monitoring performance to show results. 
The EDPS was a carefully thought out approach to help spur development, and it will serve as a strong 
basis for the SEI and other future development planning efforts. The constraints confronted by the 
EDPS were in the mismatch between funding availability and the larger scale of funding needs. Modest 
economic growth did occur and gains were made in employment and the tourism sector. The future 
challenge is to maintain a stable economy through maintenance of the two pillars (medical school, 
tourism) and additional growth through small-scale economic diversification and small business 
development efforts. 
 On the input side, fiscal reality that disallowed government cost sharing, and the uncertainty of SED 
grant funding for new projects hampered full implementation. For new project funding, Saba did not 
receive even the modest share initially envisioned to support the EDPS. The change of timing of the 
program (October 2004-September 2006- 23 months), using of funds for pre-USONA projects and 
other programs (good governance and education), also crowded out program funding. 
 The EDPS or any follow on efforts, such as the SEI, should have a very specific annual program of what 
will be done in a one year time frame and placed within at least an overall 3 year framework with a 
year-by-year budget. The grant program projects should be integrated into a medium term 
expenditure framework (MTEF) to the extent possible.’ 
 
Doelstellingen van de onderwijsprojecten  
Het samenwerkingsprogramma Onderwijs (2001-2005) bestond uit drie deelprogramma’s: 
1. funderend onderwijs: 4-15 jarigen 
2. beroepsonderwijs: voorbereidend secundair beroepsonderwijs (vsbo) en secundair beroepsonderwijs 
(sbo)  
3. institutionele en organisatorische versterking 
 
Ad 1. Doelen bij funderend onderwijs (FO): 
 gelijke ontplooiingskansen bieden aan alle leerlingen van 4 tot en met 14 jaar, ongeacht hun achtergrond 
 brede vorming bieden op intellectueel, sociaal, emotioneel, motorisch, artistiek en moreel gebied zodat 
zij optimaal maatschappelijk kunnen functioneren 
 een minimumniveau aan kennis en vaardigheden garanderen zodat alle leerlingen kunnen doorstromen 
naar vervolgonderwijs of naar de arbeidsmarkt 
 
Ad 2. Doelen bij beroepsonderwijs (SBO):  
 aansluiten op de vooropleiding 
 aansluiten bij de verschillen tussen leerlingen wat betreft belangstelling en aanleg 
 gediplomeerden afleveren die werk vinden op de lokale arbeidsmarkt of doorstromen naar 
vervolgonderwijs 
 verbeterd en vernieuwd arbeidsgericht onderwijs voor zorgleerlingen 
 effectief en efficiënt onderwijs 
 
Ad 3. Doelen bij institutionele en organisatorische versterking: 
 versterking van de institutionele capaciteit op lands- en eilandsniveau 
 zorgdragen voor een effectieve en efficiënte uitvoering van de deelprogramma’s funderend onderwijs en 
beroepsonderwijs 
 
Conclusies uit de evaluatie 
  
PwC Pagina 30 van 114
