-    
B.2.4. 2009078 Duurzaam Bonaire  
(dit project is later doorgegaan onder 2009158 –Implementatie Branding TCB) 
 
Effectiviteit 
Beoogd vs. gerealiseerd Beoogd:  
 Oorspronkelijke doelen: 
NB: Dit project heeft een 1. “Healthier environment with at least 20% less dumped waste 
herprioritering gekend waarin compared to the start situation (offset project 1) within 2 years after 
de projectdoelen volledig zijn the start of the income from the Carbon neutral project. 
herzien. Daarbij valt op dat de 2. Energy : 
doelen voor de herprioritering a. increase of sales of energy friendly consumer goods with at least 
geformuleerd zijn in termen 25 % within 2 years after the awareness programme for the 
van maatschappelijk effect population took place for the first time; 
(bijv. less dumped waste, b. more energy friendly equipment in the tourism industry; total 
increase of sales, 25% of trees investment value of at least US$ 50.400.-, which equals the 
protected), terwijl de doelen na expected contribution of tourists in the carbon neutral 
de herprioritering project in a 2 year period. These investments due to increase 
geformuleerd zijn als of knowledge and awareness campaign. Energy savings 
prestaties van de Tourism cannot be calculated; 
Corporation Bonaire (TCB). c. additional investments in sustainable issues made by at least 
50% of the organizations that participated in the awareness 
events. 
3. Nature: 
a. protection of indigenous trees against goats and donkeys where 
needed (at least 25% of the trees from an inventory list 
protected); 
b. planting of at least 125 indigenous trees compared to the existing 
situation (offset project 2), followed by yearly growth 
(Carbon Neutral Fund) on a spot where at least 75% of the 
tourists will see it at least 1 time during their visit to 
Bonaire; 
c. additional trees will be planted in the offset project by 
individuals; at least 10% of the original start of the offset 
project; 13 trees per year. 
4. Increased awareness amongst the population and the youth, leading 
to change in behavior; less dumping, less littering, more care for 
nature and environmental questions.  
5. Continuity in financing : 
a. 2 offset projects (mentioned before) from a Carbon Neutral 
project; 
b. Yearly income at least at the level of the ‘target scenario (annex 
8); US$ 50.400. 
6. A more integral approach: to the problems by addressing various 
topics on sustainability on the island, resulting in at least 3 proven 
policy decisions that contain an analysis on sustainability. 
7. A significant growth in the number of tourists that visit Bonaire for 
its ‘green image’.” 
 
Uit te voeren activiteiten na herprioritering (herziene doelstellingen zijn 
niet opgenomen in het projectdossier): 
8. Nieuwe destinatie DVD in 5 talen en 3D productie 
9. Verbouwing front office, op goedkopere wijze dan voorheen in het 
project voorzien. 
10. Nieuwe, verbeterde “Branding” voor Bonaire en de uitwerking 
daarvan in TCB’s website. 
11. Marketing support in Noord Amerika en Europa door campagnes in 
samenwerking met KLM en TUI, gericht op het realiseren van een 
groei in verblijfstoeristen van 75.000 in 2008 tot 80.000 in 2012, in 
  
PwC Pagina 93 van 114
