Summary and discussion
Jaco Dagevos and Willem Huijnk
Worlds of difference
The socio-cultural distance and position of migrant groups in the
Netherlands
S.1 Goal and questions
This report examines the socio-cultural position of members of migrant groups in the
Netherlands, with particular attention for groups at a substantial socio-cultural distance
from the host society. We distinguish between three dimensions of socio-cultural position:
a social dimension (social contacts within and outside the ethnic origin group); a cultural
dimension (value orientations); and an emotional dimensions (identification with the eth-
nic origin group and with Dutch natives). This study was carried out in the light of the
ongoing public and political debate about the wide gap that has arisen between substan-
tial numbers of migrants and what might be called the ‘mainstream’ of Dutch society. That
debate cannot be seen in isolation from the debate about the position of Muslims in the
Netherlands and attitudes towards them.
This study focuses on two main topics. First, attention is devoted to the size of the group of
migrants who (as we describe it) are at a substantial socio-cultural distance from Dutch
society. The second research question is concerned with the factors that influence differen-
ces in socio-cultural position and the onset of socio-cultural distance.
Numerous sources and research methods were used in compiling this report. Quantitative
research was used to explore the socio-cultural diversity of the four largest non-Western
migrant groups in the Netherlands, and also to assess the importance of factors that influ-
ence socio-cultural position. In addition, two themes were examined using qualitative
research. Based on interviews with experts and professionals, an insight is obtained into
the extent of and background to Islamist radicalism and extremism. An extensive qualita-
tive survey was also conducted among young Turkish-Dutch and Moroccan-Dutch
respondents. This survey was prompted by the findings of a poll commissioned by forum
Institute for Multicultural Affairs and carried out by Motivaction, which appeared to show
broad support for the so-called Islamic State (IS) group and for religiously inspired violence
among young people of Turkish origin (forum 2014). These views, which are interpreted as
an expression of cultural distance, were analysed in conjunction with questions about
interethnic contact, processes of identification and discrimination and exclusion.
278 summary and discussion
