Focus on migrant groups
As stated, this study focuses on migrants and how they relate to Dutch natives and the
Netherlands emotionally, culturally and socially. It is important to stress that this primary
focus on migrant groups to some degree leaves the host society outside the picture.
It would of course also be conceivable to carry out research among the native population
to obtain information about their social contacts, opinions and orientation towards the
Netherlands, but in this study we do not do that. A further comment that could be made of
our perspective is that the native population serves as ‘the norm’. This is perhaps most
applicable to the measurement of value orientations, in which we assume that there is a
broad consensus within the Dutch population about a number of ‘basic values’; for identi-
fication and social contacts, we describe the position on these two dimensions without
arguing a priori that an orientation towards Dutch contacts and identification with the
Netherlands should be seen as the norm. Cultural and social differences between groups in
society need not be problematic in themselves: one of the democratic freedoms is the abil-
ity for people to choose where they live, with whom they have contact and what they
think. The question is therefore when, for whom and in which areas socio-cultural differ-
ences do form a problem. In this light, it is important that socio-cultural distance and
diversity are studied in relation to their consequences, and that is precisely what we do in
this study.
S.2 Socio-cultural position and distance
S.2.1 Socio-cultural distance: accumulation in the social, cultural and emotional
dimensions
The subject of this study impinges on discussions about ‘parallel communities’ and on
research on social dividing lines. The literature on these topics assumes that divisions
between groups in society become sharper the more the – extreme – positions of individ-
ual groups on various dimensions coincide. The greater the accumulation, the deeper the
division and the greater the potential consequences. A great deal of the research on inte-
gration and related topics has to date focused on individual dimensions; less is known
about whether there is evidence of an accumulation of positions.
Against this backdrop, we opted to define a group which is at a distance from Dutch society
and with strong ties with the ethnic origin group but few contacts or emotional ties with
Dutch society, and whose members support values that are far removed from ‘mainstream
Dutch basic values’. The starting point is that there is a dominant culture which is charac-
terised by a number of basic values, such as equality of men and women, lgbts and heter-
osexuals, the right to self-determination and the separation of Church and state.
S.2.2 Seven socio-cultural categories
Latent class analysis was performed using data from the Survey of Integration of Minorities
2011 (sim’11). sim’11 focuses on persons of Turkish, Moroccan, Surinamese and Antillean ori-
gin: the four largest non-Western migrant groups in the Netherlands. Extensive informa-
279 summary and discussion
