tion was collected about the social, cultural and emotional dimensions of their socio-cul-
tural position. The outcomes of the analysis, which was based on data from 3,287 persons,
show that migrants from these groups can be divided into seven socio-cultural categories.
These categories are described below.
Segregation
The category ‘segregation’ consists of migrants who maintain close ties with their ethnic
origin group, identify with the Netherlands to only a limited extent and have few social
contacts with Dutch natives. They do not participate much in organisations, and if they do
so they have virtually no contact with Dutch natives. Compared with the other socio-
cultural categories, there is little support in this group for equality of lgbts and for issues
such as abortion and euthanasia. The emotional bond with the ethnic origin group is
strong and there is a great deal of social interaction with the members of that group.
This category fits the profile of a ‘distanced group’.
Ethnically isolated
The category ‘ethnically isolated’, like the category ‘segregation’, is characterised by the
great distance from Dutch society. There are few interethnic contacts with members of the
native Dutch population or with other migrant groups, and members have little or no
sense of being Dutch. They have a strong emotional bond with their ethnic origin group,
but have few contacts with members of that group outside their immediate circle of
friends and acquaintances. This group feel the least at home in the Netherlands, take the
least positive view of Dutch society and – judging by opinions on issues such as the posi-
tion of women and homosexuals and the separation of Church and state – are at a rela-
tively high cultural distance from Dutch society. This category too, therefore, has many of
the characteristics of a ‘distanced group’, but few social contacts with members of their
own ethnic group.
Moderate segregation
The socio-cultural category ‘moderate segregation’ is characterised by close social and
emotional ties with the ethnic origin group. Almost everyone in this category identifies
strongly or very strongly with their own ethnic group. The emotional ties to the Nether-
lands are not strong, though stronger than in the first two categories. Members of this
group maintain frequent social contacts with Dutch natives and (to a lesser extent) with
migrants from other groups. They feel less at home in the Netherlands than average and
are not very enthusiastic about Dutch society. Their views are relatively far removed from
the basic values of mainstream Dutch society.
Isolated and orientated towards the Netherlands
Characteristic of the category ‘isolated and orientated towards the Netherlands’ are the
weak social ties with both the ethnic origin group and Dutch natives. In this sense, this cat-
egory resembles the category we call ‘ethnically isolated’. The biggest difference is that the
280 summary and discussion
