emotional bond with the Netherlands is relatively strong in this group. Its members gener-
ally feel at home in the Netherlands and see themselves as Dutch. The emotional bond
with the country of origin is relatively weak and the identification with the ethnic origin
group is limited compared with the other categories. Put more broadly, the distance to the
ethnic origin group is quite substantial; the cultural distance from Dutch society is average
in this category.
Dual ties
People in this category have reasonably close ties both to members of their ethnic group
and Dutch natives: they are characterised by dual ties. The social, cultural and emotional
distance is not great. Members of this category also have relatively frequent contacts with
other migrant groups. Their identification with their own ethnic group is somewhat stron-
ger, as are the social interactions with Dutch natives. Members of this category feel quite at
home in the Netherlands and the cultural distance is relatively small.
Emphasis on the Netherlands
Members of the category ‘emphasis on the Netherlands’ are characterised by dual ties and
dual identification. They have an emotional bond and frequent contacts with both the
Netherlands and their ethnic group. They also have lots of social contacts with other
migrant groups. Their views are fairly progressive. They feel at home in the Netherlands
and take a positive view of Dutch society. Although they have dual ties, therefore, there is a
slightly stronger emphasis on the Netherlands.
Assimilation
In terms of social, emotional and cultural distance, the category labelled ‘assimilation’ is
the polar opposite of the category ‘segregation’. Members of this category have close ties
with the Netherlands, hardly identify with their ethnic origin group at all and hardly see the
country of origin as a fatherland or mother country. They also associate mainly with Dutch
natives and less so with members of their own ethnic group in organisations and associa-
tions. They feel at home in the Netherlands and take a positive view of Dutch society. They
have few contacts within their own ethnic origin group. Of all categories, this group
endorse the basic values of Dutch society most strongly.
Diverse socio-cultural landscape
Two categories can thus be identified which fit the profile of a ‘distanced group’ quite well:
the groups we have labelled here as ‘segregation’ and ‘ethnically isolated’. There are also
three ‘hybrid’ categories, which are characterised by mixed positions on the social, cultural
and emotional dimensions. Broadly speaking, the focus on the ethnic origin group is
strong, both as regards contacts and identification, but it is by no means the case that they
have no relationships with Dutch natives or that they reject Dutch society. At the other end
of the spectrum are the categories that we have labelled ‘emphasis on the Netherlands’
and ‘assimilation’. People in these two categories have frequent contacts with Dutch
281 summary and discussion
