Around half those of Turkish and Moroccan origin fall into the category ‘moderate segrega-
tion’. The main focus of their contacts and feelings of identification is on their ethnic origin
group, but they also maintain contacts with Dutch natives. People of Turkish and Moroccan
origin are much less strongly represented in the groups characterised by a relatively small
distance to Dutch society. There are for example almost no migrants of Turkish or Moroc-
can origin in the category ‘assimilation’. One in four people of Antillean origin (24%) and
one in five (19%) of Surinamese origin fall into this category. A third (32%) of those of Antil-
lean origin fall into the category ‘dual ties’.
There is not only variation between migrant groups, but also within them. Older people,
first-generation migrants, people with a low education level and those with a strong reli-
gious orientation are most often characterised by distance to Dutch society. Among sec-
ond-generation Turkish and Moroccan migrants, 5% fall into the category ‘segregation’.
Although this is a small percentage, it is worth noting because these are people who were
born and raised in the Netherlands but who feel virtually no bond with the Netherlands
and who have little contact with Dutch natives.
More extreme forms of distance: how big is the radical and extremist group?
Survey material provides a good insight into the variation in social cultural positions. It is
however important to note that surveys are less suited to measuring ‘extreme’ forms of
socio-cultural distance. Attention in the political and public debate often focuses on radi-
calism and extremism, and it may be fair to assume that radicalised individuals are less
likely to take part in surveys and/or do not always reveal their true feelings. In order none-
theless to gain some impression of the size of radicalised and extremist groups, experts
were asked to make an estimate. There was consensus that the group of extremists who
actually commit violent acts or who have travelled to Syria or Iraq is fairly small. The latest
figures from the General Intelligence and Security Service (aivd) suggest that approxi-
mately 220 individuals have travelled from the Netherlands to Syria or Iraq to date (nctv
2015).
Radical Muslims are committed to reforming society on the basis of their fundamentalist
religious beliefs. This commitment is accompanied by a rejection of the existing social,
moral and political order. Radical Muslims feel personally responsible for striving for a
social order that is based on Islam, but do not resort to using violence. It is unclear how
large this group is. Some experts believe that their number should not be exaggerated,
while others describe the numbers as ‘substantial’. Experts also differ in their concerns
about radicalisation. On the one hand there are experts who argue that those who hold
such views should not simply be labelled without qualification as problematic. In their
view, the transition from radical ideas to actual violence is not automatic and there is only
a limited ‘overflow’ into extremism. These experts see radicalisation mainly in relation to
the position of (young) Muslims who are faced with discrimination and exclusion, and
regard radical views as a sort of ‘resistance reaction’ in a bid to bring about social and
political changes in Dutch society. Other experts do worry about radicalisation, believing
that radical beliefs and ideas can later lead to extremism. In addition, support and under-
284 summary and discussion
