standing for radical ideas provides a breeding ground and legitimisation for a smaller
group to progress to committing violence.
S.3 Background to differences in socio-cultural position and distance
1
S.3.1 Outcomes of quantitative study
The quantitative part of this study reveals that the length of stay in the Netherlands, com-
mand of the Dutch language and the number of Dutch natives in the neighbourhood are
factors that reduce the chance of someone being in the category ‘segregation’. This also
applies for being in paid work and having a higher income. Work offers an opportunity to
come into contact with Dutch natives and to learn the Dutch language, and creates the
conditions for building a bond with the host society. Religious differences work through
into opinions, mutual contacts and processes of identification. In the Netherlands, Islam is
a particularly important dividing line: practising Muslims have fewer contacts with Dutch
natives and more often hold traditional views on issues such as the position of women and
homosexuals. On the other hand, many Dutch natives take a negative view of the presence
of Muslims in the Netherlands, which also reduces the chance of interethnic contact (see
Huijnk and Dagevos 2012). People of Turkish origin are the most strongly represented in
the category ‘segregation’, even after controlling for underlying factors. The Antillean
group are least often found in this category.
Consequences of distance
There are wide differences in positions and attitudes to other domains between the socio-
cultural categories. We explored the relationship with health, perceived happiness, assess-
ment of one’s own position compared with that of others (relative deprivation), perceived
discrimination and acceptance (views of the native population about the presence of
migrant groups), social and institutional trust and political interest.
People in the categories ‘ethnically isolated’ and ‘segregation’ occupy the most negative
position on almost all these domains, including after controlling for other factors such as
age, command of the language, religiosity and education. Migrants from these categories
most often report that their health is poor, that they are unhappy and that they consider
their social situation to be worse than that of other people. These groups also have the
most negative perceptions of Dutch natives, less often feeling empathy towards Dutch
natives and scoring low on social trust and political interest.
The correspondences between these two socio-cultural categories are greater than the dif-
ferences. The biggest difference relates to the perception of the social climate. People in
the ‘ethnically isolated’ category most often feel that the acceptance of migrants by Dutch
natives is low and experience the most personal discrimination. Strikingly enough, the cat-
egory ‘segregation’ occupies a middle position compared with the other categories as
regards the perception of the social climate. When people live largely in isolation from oth-
ers, it may be that the probability of negative social experiences is lower. Social trust is rel-
285 summary and discussion
