atively low in both categories, though slightly lower in the ‘ethnically isolated’ category
than in the category ‘segregation’.
The differences between the ‘segregation’ and ‘ethnically isolated’ categories are probably
greater when it comes to deviant behaviour, which could not be adequately studied using
the quantitative data available in this study. Migrants from the ‘ethnically isolated’ cate-
gory lack the protective power that social relationships can create. The high degree of
cohesion within the Turkish community is for example seen as an explanation for the low
crime rates in this group and the relatively small numbers who have travelled to Syria for
jihad (Staring et al. 2014). People who are socially isolated are more receptive to deviant
behaviour; they receive little or no exposure to social control and have less to lose.
Perceived health is poorest in the ‘segregation’ category, while feelings of unhappiness are
stronger in the ‘ethnically isolated’ category – though members of the ‘isolated and orien-
tated towards the Netherlands’ category are also relatively often unhappy. This is an indi-
cation of how social isolation contributes to feelings of unhappiness.
The picture in the ‘emphasis on the Netherlands’ and ‘assimilation’ categories is the
mirror-image of the two categories just discussed: their well-being is relatively good, their
perception of Dutch natives is positive, and their political involvement and trust in institu-
tions and other people are high. They also feel the most accepted in the Netherlands and
report relatively little perceived discrimination.
The three hybrid socio-cultural categories – ‘moderate segregation’, ‘isolated and oriented
towards the Netherlands’ and ‘dual ties’ – often occupy an intermediate position on the
different domains studied. The ‘moderate segregation’ category – which includes around
half those of Turkish and Moroccan origin – scores relatively well on health and happiness,
but as regards the (negative) perception of Dutch natives, closely resembles the views of
the two groups that are at the greatest distance from Dutch society. Members of the ‘mod-
erate segregation’ category also feel relatively unaccepted and have limited trust in institu-
tions. In contrast to quite a lot of earlier research, the group with dual ties – in Berry’s ter-
minology (1997) the ‘integration category’ – do not occupy the most favourable positions
in areas such as well-being and health.
Box S1 Other groups in the Netherlands: Roma, Somalis and Chinese
Attention thus far has focused on the four largest non-Western migrant groups in the Nether-
lands. A separate chapter of this report also looks at three other groups whose characteristics
mean they are also at some distance from Dutch society in terms of their norms and values, con-
tacts and emotional ties: Roma, Somalis and first-generation Chinese migrants. It goes beyond
the scope of this study to explore the distance to the host society of all migrant groups living in the
Netherlands. The reason for choosing these three groups is based on two considerations: first,
they are groups which are acknowledged as ‘distanced groups’ in the literature and/or in govern-
ment policy. Second, they are groups about which sufficient literature is available. Our findings are
based entirely on the literature on these three groups.
 
286 summary and discussion
