Roma are a group that has been on the policy agenda for years, despite their small number. They
are at a very great distance from Dutch society, both socio-culturally and economically as well as
geographically. All in all, they present a picture of a closed group, with a strong set of group norms
which differ in some areas from the dominant norms in Dutch society. However, this rarely if ever
translates into formal associations or discussion forums. The Roma identity and culture appears to
be very important; the group is sustained by its language and cultural traditions. The picture that
emerges from the literature is one of a high degree of social control to comply with community
norms. Mutual distrust means there appears to be little mixing between Roma and non-Roma.
The close-knit embedding in family networks, which form part of overarching (clan) structures,
prevents members of the group from becoming socially isolated due to their distance from main-
stream society. There are indications that some sections of the Roma community legitimise cer-
tain forms of criminality. The existing distance to Dutch society can lead to them seeing laws and
regulations to be less relevant. Problems such as school dropout and benefit dependency are
passed from parent to child, with the negative attitudes towards education and paid work, in par-
ticular, causing members of this group to become structurally disadvantaged. There are few
opportunities to engage in associations outside the group, and therefore little exposure to Dutch
norms and values.
 
The situation is different for the Somali group. Earlier research has shown that migrants of Somali
origin are not at a great distance from the host society in terms of identification and social con-
tact: they have relatively frequent contacts with Dutch natives and, for a group who have been in
the Netherlands for a relatively short time, often identify themselves as Dutch. Yet there are also
indications that (especially young) Somalis feel dissociated from the Netherlands. Twenty inter-
views with young Somalis led Moors et al. (2010) to posit that this group experience a wide gulf
between the worlds in which Dutch natives and Somalis live, as expressed for example in conflict-
ing (cultural) values. Compared with other migrant groups in the Netherlands, those of Somali ori-
gin are highly religious, especially when it comes to following religious rules. Their religious views
are partly reflected in their traditional views on the division of roles between men and women.
One risk factor for the Somali group in the Netherlands is the extent of their socio-economic dis-
advantage. Many are poorly educated; a very high proportion are in receipt of social assistance
benefit high and many children grow up in poverty. They face an accumulation of problems: many
of them are traumatised by experiences in Somalia, there is a cultural distance to the Netherlands,
they are overrepresented in the crime figures and are in a very weak economic position. All of this
could translate into growing dissatisfaction within the Somali migrant group, especially those of
the second generation, who have very different expectations from society than their parents’ gen-
eration. Moors et al. (2010) observe that there is a ‘susceptibility to religious orthodoxy’ among
young Somalis which provides fertile ground for radicalisation.
 
First-generation Chinese migrants appear to be subject to different processes again. The social
distance between Dutch society and first-generation Chinese migrants, who came to the Nether-
lands some time ago and often work in the hospitality industry, is relatively wide. There is also a
dissociation in terms of identification, feeling at home and family values. The dividing lines appear
to stem more from a strong focus on economic participation than from a deliberate creation of
distance. The relative openness to engaging in relationships with people outside the Chinese com-
munity supports this idea, as does the positive perception of the Chinese community in the Neth-
erlands. Most first-generation Chinese migrants were employed in the hospitality industry, where
(either as self-employed or waged employees) they worked long hours. The limited time remain-
ing was spent mainly on the family, leaving little time for social activities or things such as learning
287 summary and discussion
