Dutch (something that was also not necessary for working in a kitchen, for example). Given the
nature of their work, to the extent that there were any social contacts at all, contacts in the work-
place were largely contained within the community. Several studies show that the bond with other
members of the Chinese community in the Netherlands is relatively weak, but that members of
the Chinese community are strongly focused on their own family and on people originating from
the same village or region in China.
S.3.3 Background to radicalisation: interviews with experts and findings from the
literature
In our study we see radical Muslims as a particular example of a group at great socio-
cultural distance from the host society. Based on interviews with experts we investigated
the background to processes of radicalisation. A distinction was made between ‘push’ and
‘pull’ factors: push factors are factors which make individuals receptive to radicalisation
and as it were push them away from the support of the existing social, political and moral
order. Pull factors are reasons or motives which cause individuals to feel attracted to radi-
cal Islam – for example seeking a sense of purpose, wanting to belong to a group or a
desire for adventure.
Push factors for radicalisation
Many experts point to feelings of exclusion and discrimination as a key cause of the rejec-
tion of Dutch society by young members of migrant groups. Discrimination is cited at
school or work, for example, but forms of social and cultural exclusion appear to be more
important. This entails the feeling of being treated differently, of not automatically being
seen as part of Dutch society. These young people feel that social and cultural barriers are
thrown up and that they are seen as outsiders. At the same time, many young people of
Turkish and Moroccan origin were born in the Netherlands, giving this sense of being
unwelcome extra impact.
This explanation for the onset of distance also emerges explicitly in the research carried
out for this report among Turkish-Dutch and Moroccan-Dutch youngsters, many of whom
report that they constantly have the feeling of not belonging (we will discuss these findings
later). For some respondents, the idea of being set at a distance has to do with a sense that
certain views and attitudes are not acceptable in the Netherlands. The cultural mainstream
– in which views on issues such as the position of women and homosexuality play an
important role – brooks virtually no other views, particularly if they are held by migrants
and Muslims or their descendants. In this context, experts point out that this causes young
Muslims to feel that their thoughts and actions are viewed differently, and that double
standards apply. For example, they feel that more attention is given to Western victims
(e.g. following the attack on the editors of the Charlie Hebdo magazine in Paris) than to the
deaths of Muslims (e.g. Palestinians), and that hurtful statements by politicians about
Muslims are seen as acceptable but that there is less freedom to express opposing views.
There is a sense of injustice and moral indignation about the national and international
framing of events. Combined with perceptions of rejection and stigmatisation by Dutch
288 summary and discussion
