society, ontological questions (Where do I belong? What is my place in the world?) become
very pertinent.
Pull factors for radicalisation
The ontological questions posed by young people as a result of the push factors have a
partial counterpart in the form of pull factors, which as it were draw people into a radical
movement or radical ideas. The propaganda spread by radical Islam plays upon this clev-
erly by stressing that it has an answer to young people’s questions and needs, and by
simultaneously eliciting and reinforcing those needs. For example, the film clips released
by IS give the impression that Muslims throughout the world are being persecuted. And by
emphasising their military successes, young members of IS sow the idea that violence and
struggle is a way of changing the unjust and unequal treatment of Muslims throughout the
world.
Young people generally have a strong need to belong, and this may apply in particular for
young Muslims and migrants, for example driven by a need for recognition and bonding
for which they see little opportunity in the Netherlands, and by the distance that many of
them feel towards their parents. Many young people, especially Moroccans, find a bond
with a Muslim identity; this helps them feel part of a global community (ummah) from
which they can derive status and pride.
Affiliation with a radical Islamist group can also be a way of making a new start and eradi-
cating a stained past. Young men can become warriors, young women can contribute as a
mother and spouse. Radical Islam provides an opportunity to achieve a new status, not just
for those who actually travel to Syria and Iraq, but also for those who immerse themselves
in the radical ideology and who associate with groups of like-minded people. In addition,
the international jihad appeals to a hankering for adventure.
Radical Islam also offers an answer to the question, ‘What is my place in the world?’.
That is a question which all young people sometimes ask themselves, but which may carry
more pertinence for young migrants faced with feelings of being excluded. Religion can
provide an answer to such existential questions. The radical variant of Islam, in particular,
offers an all-encompassing and unambiguous framework. At micro-level, it offers certainty
because of the plethora of rules dictating how the true believer should behave. At micro-
level, Islam offers a comprehensive world view in which the believer can play a role (i.e.:
war is being waged against Islam; the true believer has a duty to rise up against this and
ultimately to attain their place in paradise).
There is a complex interplay between the push and pull factors. The process leading to rad-
icalisation is made up of a complex web of interactions that impinge on and reinforce each
other. The importance of the different push and pull factors can be different for each indi-
vidual: what was important for one radicalised person cannot be simply assumed to apply
to another. In short, the predictive value of the factors cited is probably not great, and they
are moreover interwoven in a complicated pattern. What does seem to be clear is that rad-
icalisation often appeals to vulnerable individuals. Research by Weenink (2015) on those
who actually or potentially travel to Syria and Iraq suggests that they are more likely than
289 summary and discussion
