average to have a criminal background. The same study also suggests that psychosocial
characteristics play a role, with a combination of psychological disorders and social isola-
tion from their immediate setting possibly increasing their susceptibility to radicalisation.
Going through a personal crisis can also cause them to doubt long-held views and ideas
and create space for other, more radical ideas.
S.3.4 Young people of Turkish and Moroccan origin on religiously inspired violence,
identification, social networks and exclusion
The qualitative survey of youngsters of Turkish and Moroccan origin was intended to
obtain a clearer picture of their socio-cultural position, with particular attention for their
views on religiously inspired violence, which we regard as an indicator of the cultural
dimension of the socio-cultural position. Among the topics discussed with the respondents
were IS, travelling to Iraq and Syria for jihad and the attacks on the editors of the Charlie
Hebdo in Paris. The relationship between their views and the social and identification
dimensions was explored, as were possible relationships with the perceptions and behav-
iour of the dominant society.
A total of 120 Turkish and Moroccan youngsters took part in group discussions. In addition,
eighteen representatives of religious and political movements and twenty experts were
interviewed
Identification
The country of origin of their parents also plays a prominent role for young people born
and raised in the Netherlands in determining where they feel they belong and how they
feel about that. Young people with Moroccan roots often state that they feel Moroccan,
giving as a reason that their parents come from Morocco and have brought them up
according to Moroccan customs. They feel at home in Moroccan traditions, celebrations
and rituals, and attach great importance to family and family relations – which are differ-
ent from what they observe in Dutch families. At the same time, they were born and raised
in the Netherlands, live their lives in the Netherlands and often have their most important
networks in the Netherlands. Accordingly, they often also feel Dutch.
For young people of Turkish origin, the questions in relation to identification and belonging
are not essentially different from in the Moroccan group; they feel a bond both with Turkey
and with the Netherlands. There does however appear to be more emphasis on the Turkish
origins in this group: in our survey we found virtually no respondents who feel a bond only
with the Netherlands. That picture is in line with the quantitative data, which showed that
a unilaterally strong identification with the Netherlands is almost non-existent among per-
sons of Turkish and Moroccan origin. Data on young people show that around half those of
Turkish and Moroccan origin identify or identify strongly with the ethnic origin group, but
do not feel Dutch (Huijnk and Dagevos 2012) – though they do often feel a fairly strong
identification with the city where they live and grew up (cf. Entzinger and Dourleijn 2008).
A specific point that applies for those with Turkish roots is that not everyone originating
from Turkey feels Turkish: for example, Kurdish youngsters often prefer to see themselves
290 summary and discussion
