as Dutch Kurds rather than Turkish Kurds. There is also a dividing line within the Turkish
group between Alevis and Sunnis. Alevi youngsters, in particular, feel that they are not
accepted by Sunni Turks. These dividing lines have their origin in Turkey but are still evident
in the Turkish community in the Netherlands.
Young people who took part in the qualitative study often resemble the category ‘moder-
ate segregation’: they have relationships with Dutch natives, but are also strongly embed-
ded in their ethnic origin group, both as regards identification and contacts.
For many young people, religion is an important part of their identity. Almost all the
respondents say they are Muslim and attach great importance to following the rules of
Islam. A sizeable proportion feel they are Muslim first: for many, this is their ‘number one
identity’. Islam is the most important point of reference for many young people, giving
direction to almost every aspect of their lives. Knowing the rules, obeying them and
reflecting on how they can be guided (even) better by Islam is a daily quest for many young
Muslims. This also means they are constantly searching for information and knowledge.
For youngsters of Moroccan origin, in particular, their parents or Moroccan organisations
fulfil these needs to only a limited extent, and young people are then inclined to turn to
clerics, the Internet and their peers for answers to their questions. Living in a Western soci-
ety which upholds views that are not prescribed by their religion also appears to
strengthen the determination of some young people to adhere closely to that religion.
Their lifestyle consequently differs greatly from that of their native peers. The Muslim
identity is an alternative to an identification as a Dutch citizen. It also appears to be an
alternative to a Moroccan identity, because it makes them part of a large global community
(the ummah) which offers moral frameworks and gives them a sense of belonging.
A characteristic of young Moroccans and Turks is their sense of having multiple identities.
They are Moroccan or Turkish, they are Dutch, they are Rotterdammers and they are –
above all – Muslim. In principle, our respondents feel that this can have all kinds of advan-
tages. These young people are familiar with different worlds, and are able to put views and
behaviour from those two worlds into better perspective. Switching between those identi-
ties need also not be a problem: depending on the context – e.g. home or work – the bal-
ance shifts from being Moroccan or Turkish towards being more Dutch, or vice versa. How-
ever, young people feel that this choice is often made by others: their setting determines
whether they are Moroccan Muslim, even though the context is Dutch. All this gives young
migrants the feeling that they are not allowed to see themselves as Dutch, because those
around them predominantly see them as Moroccan or Turkish or Muslim. Being as it were
forced into seeing themselves in a particular way is experienced as a form of exclusion:
they are not seen as citizens, but as members of a migrant or religious group, even in con-
texts where they believe this background to be irrelevant. They have the feeling that their
Dutch identity is taken away from them and that a Muslim and Moroccan or Turkish iden-
tity is forced upon them, whereas they see no problem in having multiple identities along-
side each other. ‘You’re never Dutch enough’, as one of the respondents put it. This is the
same social and cultural exclusion that was highlighted by experts as one of the drivers of
radicalisation.
291 summary and discussion
