Many young people thus feel that they are systematically pushed away in the Netherlands,
seen as different and treated differently. This happens in day-to-day interactions, in the
media and in statements by politicians. It is difficult to determine using quantitative data
whether young people identify themselves as Moroccan or Turkish more strongly today
than in the past, but that is the feeling of the young people in our study: they believe that
the identification with their ethnic origin group and with religion has grown stronger dur-
ing their lives. This is due to changes in their life stage: work and family mean that people
have less time for wide social networks, and therefore choose contacts that are closest to
them. Young people (especially those of Moroccan origin) also cite the unfavourable cli-
mate for migrant groups and Muslims as an important reason for the increased identifica-
tion with their religion. The assault on the World Trade Center in New York on 11 September
2001 (‘9/11’) is often described as a turning point, after which the perception of Muslims in
the Netherlands deteriorated. In this sense, the Muslim identity can also be seen as a
‘resistance identity’, which has grown as a reaction to their negative perception of the
social attitudes in the Netherlands towards migrants and Muslims.
Social contacts and embedding in the origin group
The relatively strong identification with their ethnic origin group and with Islam is also
reflected in the social networks of Turkish-Dutch and Moroccan-Dutch youngsters. Broadly
speaking, quantitative data suggest that they have a mixed circle of friends and acquain-
tances (Huijnk and Dagevos 2012), but the qualitative part of our study makes clear that the
emphasis is on contacts with young people from the same ethnic origin group. Generally
speaking, young people engage with people from their own ethnic origin group if the con-
tacts are more intensive and more personal. Close friendships between Moroccan-Dutch
and Turkish-Dutch youngsters with Dutch natives appear to be relatively rare: ‘true friends’
are Turkish or Moroccan; acquaintances can be Dutch natives. The scarcity of mixed mar-
riages in the Turkish and Moroccan groups underlines this, accounting for fewer than 10%
of marriages in these groups each year. The relative ethnic homogeneity of the networks is
linked among other things to the general principle of similarity: people prefer to mix with
others with the same background. This is affirmed by young Turkish-Dutch and Moroccan-
Dutch people: they have a common background, which means that certain behaviours
(such as not drinking alcohol and participating in Ramadan) are accepted automatically and
do not have to be explained, or even worse, justified. The different sexual morals and
sometimes harsh humour of Dutch natives are also cited as reasons for preferring contacts
with members of one’s own group. Sharing the same ethnic and cultural background and
the same religion all play a role here and contribute to the sense of like-mindedness, which
acts as a lubricant for engaging in and prolonging social contacts with their own group.
Young people feel that their networks are becoming more homogenous rather than more
ethnically mixed. Dividing lines between the groups appear to be becoming stronger as
they grow older, especially as regards important, close contacts.
Within the Turkish group, differences between ethnic and political-religious groups appear
to be related not only to identification, but also to the make-up of their social networks.
292 summary and discussion
