Friendships between Kurdish and ethnic Turks seem to be relatively rare. Religious affilia-
tion also matters, especially for Alevis and Sunnis. At the same time, some of these divid-
ing lines are fairly fluid, as evidenced among other things by mixed friendships and moving
from one religious organisation to another.
Views on religiously inspired violence
The immediate reason for our survey of Turkish and Moroccan youngsters were rumours
about broad support for religiously inspired violence and groups such as IS (forum 2014).
That is certainly not the picture that emerges from our study: young people express abhor-
rence and disapproval regarding the violence perpetrated by IS. Yet views about religious
violence and movements such as IS cannot be seen in isolation from a frame of reference
that is fed by the networks of young people and their religious and national identity.
The strong orientation towards and attachment to Islam carries great weight here. There is
a widespread and deeply felt conviction among the young persons interviewed that double
standards are applied in the Netherlands and the West, and always to the disadvantage of
Muslims. This influences the way in which IS or the attacks on the editors of the French
magazine Charlie Hebdo are viewed. On the one hand, violence is condemned, and young
people feel little affinity with jihadis travelling to Syria and Iraq or the rise of IS. On the
other hand, they place question marks alongside the perceptions of people in the West and
contest the source of the violence. They often refer to the regime of President Assad in
Syria; most of them find Assad’s actions in the civil war there, and especially the violence
against citizens, abhorrent. They do not understand why the West (led by the us) did not
take stronger action against Assad, in contrast to other conflict situations such as Iraq or
Libya where action was taken (and with much less cause). In the eyes of some young
people, IS is the local response to Assad and the lack of Western intervention in Syria. They
do not approve of the way in which IS operates, but do understand the reason for its crea-
tion and success.
They also disapprove of and do not understand the fact that IS perpetrates violence in the
name of Islam and engages in practices that are contrary to the values of the religion.
The actions of IS do not correspond to the Islam that they know and experience. Muslims,
or warriors in the name of Islam, do not kill women and children, do not murder Muslims
or non-Muslims and do not seek to destroy religious artefacts. Those who do so must have
a deficient knowledge of Islam. The respondents ask themselves whether IS can actually be
regarded as Islamic and whether its members – given their un-Islamic acts – are true Mus-
lims. They believe firmly that, if the acts have actually been committed, they do not match
the doctrine of Islam. IS does not fit into the frame of reference of Islam as a peaceful reli-
gion. Instead, they see a movement which attacks other Muslims and perpetrates atroci-
ties, and therefore gives Muslims throughout the world a bad name. By casting doubt on
the Islamic credentials of IS, Turkish-Dutch and Moroccan-Dutch youngsters see this
movement as separate from the religion as many of them know and experience it.
The actions of IS can thus not be ascribed to their religion; that is a form of externalisation.
The young respondents in our survey also doubt the veracity of reports about IS. They do
293 summary and discussion
