not trust the media, and especially the Dutch and Western media, which many of them
regard as inherently partisan, with one-sided reporting about Muslims. One of the most
direct examples of this opinion was the view expressed by one of the respondents that the
images of beheadings by IS are faked.
The views of young Turkish-Dutch respondents about IS reflect the current political and
ethnic relations within the Turkish community (both in the Netherlands and Turkey). Young
Sunni Turks in the Netherlands associate the actions of IS with the battle against the Kurds,
2
and more specifically against the pkk , which they believe should be seen as a terrorist
organisation that has killed thousands. The fact that the actions of IS are also directed
against the Kurds and the pkk means that some young people of Turkish origin express a
cautious sympathy for IS, under the credo ‘the enemy of my enemy is my friend’. Some
Turkish youngsters are worried about the strengthening of the position of the pkk and
Kurds because they are gaining military successes against IS and have now established a
Kurdish region within Syria and Iraq. The fact that some appeared to condone IS is also
linked to the view of young Turkish Sunnis that the West has failed to help the resistance
against Assad. They believe that Assad embodies the suppression of Sunnis in Syria.
When the civil war broke out, the West remained aloof for a long time. IS may well be a
brutal and barbaric movement, but it has at least shown resistance to the oppressive Ala-
wite regime under Assad. We did not encounter such views and arguments among the
Kurdish and Alevi youngsters in this study: they are unanimous in their fierce condemna-
tion of IS. Not only do they point to the violent nature of this movement, but in their eyes
the battle against the Kurds also plays an emphatic role. For Alevis, the Sunni affiliation of
IS is a factor. The uneasy relationship between Sunnis and Alevis goes back centuries and
also has an impact in the Netherlands. The Syrian conflict is viewed through this lens, and
reference is also made to the role of the Turkish state and President Erdogan, which the
respondents concerned argue are facilitating the struggle of IS and certainly not doing any-
thing to combat it.
All sorts of conspiracy theories about IS circulate among young Turkish-Dutch and
Moroccan-Dutch people. This is inextricably linked to the confusion they feel about IS, the
reporting about Muslims and the distrust of the intentions of the Western powers in the
Middle East. It is for example rumoured that IS was created at the behest of the Israeli and
us secret services to fuel the divisions between Muslims and to discredit Islam. The first
reports about beheadings more or less coincided with the Gaza war in the summer of 2014,
and the theory is that they were a ploy to divert attention from the war. Young people also
wonder aloud why IS attacks other Muslims rather than an obvious target such as Israel.
The rumours also suggest that there are secret images showing IS fighters wearing Stars of
David beneath their black robes. According to other theories, IS and terrorist attacks can be
traced back to a small elite group who operate in the shadows IS shape world politics and
who have an as yet unknown interest in discrediting Muslims. The conspiracy theories are
an indication of how difficult young people find it to fit IS into their world view.
Some of the conspiracy theories among young migrants of Turkish origin can be traced to
the internal divisions within the Turkish community. An example of Kurdish conspiracy the-
294 summary and discussion
