ories is that IS is sustained by the Turkish state, and President Erdogan in particular, as part
of a bid to establish a major empire that encompasses Syria and Iran and in which there is
no place for Kurds. Sunni and nationalist Turkish migrants associate IS and the conflict in
Syria with the actions of Western secret services and Zionism, as a means of curbing the
growing economic and political power of Turkey.
Conspiracy theories cannot be seen in isolation from the strong perceptions that young
people have of religion and their ethnic and political identity. Conspiracy theories reduce
reality to proportions that fit within the world view that young people have of Islam and
their orientation towards political and ethnic groups.
Perceived exclusion
The different dimensions of socio-cultural position distinguished here are closely interrela-
ted. The relatively strong embedding in their own community, their ethnic and Muslim
identification influence the way in which these migrants view Muslim extremism. Politico-
ethnic and religious dividing lines within the Turkish community (both in Turkey and the
Netherlands) help determine the contacts in which people engage, the groups with which
they identify and the groups they reject. The fact that a different frame of reference is used
and that identification and social embedding are relatively strongly focused on the ethnic
origin group and on Islam can also not be seen in isolation from the way in which young
Turkish-Dutch and Moroccan-Dutch people perceive and define their position in the Neth-
erlands. Many feel that they do not belong and that they are seen as different because of
their origin and their religion. This manifests itself at various levels. In everyday situations,
for example, sometimes apparently superficial questions are asked about where young
people come from, or a comment is made about how well they speak Dutch. This is some-
times well intentioned, but is perceived as exclusion and comes across as if the young peo-
ple concerned are regarded as aliens rather than as Dutch citizens. Comments such as,
‘you’re very different from other Moroccans’ also make young people feel they are being
set apart: they want to be seen as individuals and as citizens of the Netherlands, not spo-
ken to by others as if they were members of a group. This definitely applies where the con-
text for these kinds of questions and comments is not relevant, for example in job applica-
tions, giving young people the feeling that the negative stereotypes about ‘the’ Moroccan
or Turkish group are being projected on them. Women who start wearing the headscarf
also notice a difference in the way they are approached by others: they suddenly begin
receiving more frequent jibes in the streets and at work, and it is more often assumed that
they do not speak Dutch or have a low education level. It is also evident from the extra
attention paid to young migrants, for example at the workplace. There is a widely held
feeling among young migrants of Turkish and Moroccan origin that they have to work extra
hard to prove themselves (‘you start one-nil down’), that errors at work are treated more
seriously and that they have fewer job and career opportunities.
Virtually all young Moroccan men in our study have regular experience of being stopped by
the police. We heard this much less from youngsters of Turkish origin. In the group discus-
sion with lower-educated young Moroccans, the spontaneous response to the question,
295 summary and discussion
