‘What is typically Moroccan?’ was ‘Stop! Police!’, evidently reflecting the frequency with
which these young people are stopped by the police. This seems to happen less frequently
to more highly educated young Moroccan men, though they also report that they have
been stopped more than once without clear reason. These young people have no doubt
that the police are guilty of ethnic profiling, and this contributes to the feeling that extra
attention is paid to young Moroccans. What dominates, however, is the feeling of exclu-
sion and stigmatisation, and that undermines their trust in the police.
All this fits in with the sombre picture that young migrants have of the social climate in the
Netherlands. It seems as if young Moroccans are even more sombre about this than young
people with Turkish roots. Young people feel excluded in everyday situations, on the labour
market and in contacts with the police, and this climate is reflected in the reporting in the
Dutch media. According to the young people in our study, Dutch media only publish
reports about Moroccans or Muslims if they are in the news for negative reasons. If a
Moroccan Muslim has done something good, the media ignore it or the person concerned
is seen as Dutch. If a Muslim is a perpetrator, this receives wide attention, but if a Muslim is
a victim, the Dutch and Western media stay silent. The notion of double standards thus
extends to the media as well. Trust in the Dutch and Western media is not high, and this is
exacerbated by the fact that many young people use foreign news sites and watch chan-
nels such as Al Jazeera. These media publish different reports, with a different perspective
and a different tone. The fact that the reporting in the Netherlands is so different contrib-
utes in the minds of these young people to the sense of living in a foreign country. They
have the idea that freedom of expression means something different for a Muslim than for
a non-Muslim. Islamist clerics (‘hate imams’) are refused entry to the Netherlands, but a
rabbi who is suspected of child abuse is allowed in. Cartoons depicting the Prophet, which
hurt Muslims deeply, are permitted, but insulting the Dutch king is not (at least, that is the
perception of some of the youngsters interviewed). Muslims are accused of being over-
sensitive and urged to be ‘more tolerant’. They counter this with the argument that there is
a dual morality with respect to freedom of expression.
The feeling by young migrants that they are seen as a separate group is also fuelled by the
political debate and statements by politicians. Youngsters of Moroccan origin refer not just
to the populist right-winger Geert Wilders in this regard, but above all to the Moroccan-
Dutch mayor of Rotterdam, Ahmed Aboutaleb. His statements that certain individuals
should ‘f*** off’ following the Charlie Hebdo attacks in Paris is seen by Moroccan-Dutch
youngsters as indicating that they evidently do not belong in Dutch society. Such state-
ments are also seen as political opportunism, with Aboutaleb only being heard from when
things go wrong. The statement by Dutch Prime Minister Marc Rutte that migrants must
‘fight their way into the labour market’ also causes irritation and prompts young people to
wonder rhetorically whether this means that discrimination does not need to be tackled.
They have frequent experiences of discrimination and a sense of having to prove them-
selves twice over, even though they were born in the Netherlands and when they have the
same qualifications as a Dutch native. Turkish youngsters are particularly disappointed in
the Dutch Labour Party (PvdA), and especially in the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
296 summary and discussion
