Social Affairs and Employment, Lodewijk Asscher, who has thrown away his credibility by
refusing to distance himself from the findings of the poll by Motivaction/forum and the
survey of Turkish organisations that he commissioned. The Labour Party is no longer seen
as a natural ally by Turkish youngsters, but there is no clear alternative available, leaving
them feeling that there is no one to stand up for them. The name of Geert Wilders is also
raised when the discussion turns to the political climate. His statement about ‘fewer
Moroccans’ had a major impact. The young people in our study feel that his actions and
statements contribute to climate in which it is increasingly acceptable to make conde-
scending and discriminatory statements about Islam and Muslims. This puts even more
pressure on the relations between population groups.
In general, young migrants feel they are not (any longer) represented by politicians. As well
as the feeling that politicians have turned away from migrants and Muslims, religious argu-
ments also play a role. The Salafist youngsters we interviewed recognise no worldly
authority: in their own words, they live by the laws of God. Other young people are mainly
disappointed in politics because (as explained above) they no longer feel their interests are
represented by the government and mps.
S.4 Discussion: a nation of distance
This study highlights the diversity of the socio-cultural landscape in the Netherlands in sev-
eral ways. The quantitative study produces a typology of seven different socio-cultural cat-
egories, each with its own combination of positions on the emotional, social and cultural
dimension. In the categories ‘segregation’ and ‘ethnically isolated’ and their socio-cultural
opposite ‘assimilation’, the positions on these dimensions coincide. The category ‘segrega-
tion’ consists mainly of low-educated first-generation Turkish and Moroccan migrants.
Assimilation patterns are found mainly among second-generation Surinamese and Antil-
lean migrants. The majority of migrants with a Turkish and Moroccan background occupy a
hybrid socio-cultural position, often strongly embedded in their own ethnic group but also
with clear links to the host society; there are frequent cases of dual ties and hybrid identi-
ties. This also characterises many young people of Turkish and Moroccan origin.
The literature mainly expresses concerns about ‘parallel communities’, characterised by an
accumulation of one-sided positions on several dimensions. This study also shows that, for
example in terms of health and social trust, the categories ‘segregation’ and ‘ethnically iso-
lated’ are not in a good place. However, this study also shows that a young people of Turk-
ish and Moroccan origin, who can generally be assigned to the category ‘moderate segre-
gation’ have a relationship with Dutch society that at the very least can be described as
complex. Their profile does not meet definitions of parallel communities, yet there is evi-
dence of distance. The survey of Turkish-Dutch and Moroccan-Dutch youngsters indicates
that, although they were born and raised in the Netherlands, and although many of them
identify themselves as Dutch to a greater or lesser extent, they are often regarded as mem-
bers of a migrant group rather than as citizens of the Netherlands. They are challenged and
judged on the basis of their group membership and religious affiliation, even where that is
297 summary and discussion
