not relevant in context. The way the Dutch and Western media describe international
events is seen as one-sided and therefore often as hypocritical. This exacerbates feelings of
injustice and exclusion – not just because they also look at other news sources, but also
because it raises questions as to why certain events are not shown in the Netherlands. This
then contributes to conspiracy theories, to which many young people are susceptible and
which are espoused on a large scale on foreign news channels. Young people often feel dis-
trustful and negative towards contacts with natives, Western media and politics, and this
contributes to a strong orientation towards their own ethnic group and their religion. The
interviews with experts suggest that the notion that young people themselves and – per-
haps more importantly – their religious and ethnic groups are systematically put at a dis-
tance is one of the driving forces of radicalisation.
It has been clear for some time that interethnic relations in the Netherlands are under
pressure. However, the interviews with young people of Turkish and Moroccan roots,
in particular, confronted us with the facts: the feeling of being excluded is widespread and
strong. At the same time, it is striking that young people of Turkish and Moroccan origin
are surprised that some of their views are sensitive in the Netherlands. In today’s Dutch
society, it seems as if mutual empathy is sometimes a long way off. This is sometimes
because the differences in views are almost unbridgeable, for example concerning themes
that are (now) regarded as mainstream in the Netherlands, such as the position of lgbts.
Young people of Moroccan origin talk about ethnic profiling, but ignore the concerns of the
native population about the (factually recorded) high crime figures in the Moroccan group.
That is not to legitimise ethnic profiling by the police, but it does help to explain the fre-
quent detention of Moroccan-Dutch migrants. The different population groups live in fairly
separate worlds, and this means there is little scope for them to influence each other’s
frames of reference. The consequence of this is that different groups do not understand
each other’s narrative and reasoning, and make no attempt to do so. It might for example
help to know that insulting the Prophet is regarded as very hurtful – not in order to justify
violence, but in order to gain some understanding of Muslim youngsters who refer to this
when expressing their views about the attacks on the Charlie Hebdo magazine. The fact that
Moroccan-Dutch and Turkish-Dutch youngsters do not unequivocally condemn is need not
be a direct signifier of radical thoughts, but may reflect the fact that they include the mis-
deeds of the Assad family in their opinion. At present, the frames of reference are far apart.
We appear to be living in a split-screen world: “Depending on what part of the screen you are look-
ing at, you will have a very different perception of where things stand” (taken from Duurvoort 2015).
On the one hand there are Muslims who believe that they and their religious group are
regarded as second-class citizens, and on the other there are Dutch natives who see the
presence of Muslims and migrants as a threat to their core values and who associate that
presence with criminality and violence. The idea that integration would take a major step
forward with the growth of the second migrant generation has only partially become a
reality. Some progress is visible on the labour market and in education, but it is worrying
that the social and cultural differences are so great. This makes the Netherlands a ‘nation
of distance’. The well-known integration researcher Richard Alba has argued that integra-
298 summary and discussion
