Vergunningverlening, toezicht en handhaving (VTH) door het Openbaar Lichaam Saba 
 
 
Summary 
 
Assignment and investigation 
th
On the 4 of October 2022, the State Secretary of Infrastructure and Water 
Management (Infrastructuur en Waterstaat, IenW) requested the Human 
Environment and Transport Inspectorate (Inspectie Leefomgeving en Transport), 
hereinafter ILT, to conduct an investigation into permits, supervision and 
enforcement (VTH) on Bonaire, St. Eustatius and Saba. The State Secretary also 
requested recommendations for improving the VTH system and introducing ‘checks 
and balances’. The investigation was conducted in coordination with the Minister for 
Nature and Nitrogen of the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality 
(Ministerie van Landbouw, Natuur en Voedselkwaliteit) hereinafter LNV. 
 
This report presents the outcome of that investigation and focuses specifically on 
the execution of the VTH tasks relating to construction, the environment and nature 
by the Public Entity Saba (OLS). The project team formed by ILT and LNV visited 
Saba twice for the purposes of the investigation. In addition, interviews were 
conducted and documents and reports were studied. OLS employees cooperated 
fully in providing information for the investigation and ensured that the project team 
could interview the desired individuals. 
 
Results 
The ILT concludes that the execution of VTH tasks relating to construction, the 
environment and nature on Saba does not comply with legal requirements and local 
regulations. This conclusion is based on the following observations. 
 
Permits 
• There is a Nuisance Ordinance in effect, but no businesses have been 
identified that require a permit under this ordinance. 
• The OLS does not have an up-to-date list of businesses that are required to 
have an environment permit, or are subject to a reporting obligation, after 
the BES Establishment and Activities Decree (Inrichtingen- en 
Activiteitenbesluit BES), hereinafter IAB BES, comes into effect. 
• Virtually no permits are issued.  
 
Example 
Saba's waste processing company collects household and commercial waste, 
separates it into waste streams and exports much of the waste. In the past, several 
waste streams were incinerated. Only timber and medical waste are incinerated 
now. This company does not have to have a permit and no requirements have been 
set in relation to waste acceptance, emissions to the air from the incinerator or 
storage of the incineration ash. 
 
Supervision 
• The OLS does not engage in supervision relating to construction, the 
environment/nuisance or nature. 
 
Example 
A business consists of several facilities that are close to each other: a quarry, a gas 
bottle filling station, a petrol station and a liquid fuel storage area. This company is 
not regulated by a permit; the OLS does not conduct supervision. 
 
 
Enforcement 
  
Pagina 8 van 39
