Vergunningverlening, toezicht en handhaving (VTH) door het Openbaar Lichaam Saba 
 
 
• Due to the lack of supervision, no enforcement takes place. 
 
Underlying causes 
The OLS faces several bottlenecks that prevent adequate execution of VTH. The ILT 
has identified a number of causes in this regard. 
 
Staff and organisation 
• A permit issue officer has been appointed for construction, but there is no 
permit issue officer for nuisance or ecological permits.  
• There are no supervisors for the nuisance and building permits. The open 
position for a building inspector has not been filled.  
 
Resources and processes 
• No schedule has been set for ecological supervision. 
• No support systems are in place for VTH and document registration and 
archiving. There is a lack of overview as a result. 
 
Culture and managerial influence 
• The employees of OLS are managed ad hoc based on prior consent from the 
Executive Council (bestuurscollege, BC). Consequently, daily operations are 
under direct management control. 
 
Involvement of the Dutch government 
• The Dutch government has limited involvement in supporting the VTH 
process for construction, the environment or nature. 
• Despite the fact that the OLS does not execute VTH tasks for construction 
and nature, the Kingdom Representative (Rijksvertegenwoordiger), 
hereinafter RV, has not carried out further investigation in the context of 
intergovernmental supervision (interbestuurlijk toezicht), hereinafter IBT. 
Nuisance is not currently included in the scope of IBT. 
• The RV's application of IBT is complicated by the fact that the latter has 
powers but no supervisors have been designated to support his tasks. 
 
Conclusion 
The OLS’s execution of the VTH tasks is not in order. In addition, checks and 
balances are lacking within the organisation. The interests that laws relating to 
construction, the environment and nature are intended to protect are either not 
being protected at all, or not being protected adequately. Due to many, sometimes 
strongly interdependent causes, a fundamental change in the execution of VTH 
tasks is needed in order to improve the situation. 
 
Recommendations 
The ILT recommends the following action to improve execution of the VTH tasks 
relating to construction, the environment and nature. 
 
Recommendation 1 (Dutch government) 
Rapidly transfer the execution of the entire VTH task package relating to 
construction, the environment and nature to a single existing environment agency in 
the Netherlands in Europe. This ensures retention of knowledge and experience, and 
guarantees continuity, while at the same time distancing the activities from the 
government. 
• In line with the situation in the Netherlands in Europe, the public entity 
retains its powers and continues to have final responsibility. The tasks are 
  
Pagina 9 van 3
