Vergunningverlening, toezicht en handhaving (VTH) door het Openbaar Lichaam Saba 
 
 
executed by the environment agency. The OLS gives the director of this 
environment agency a mandate to sign permits and enforcement orders. 
• Immediately start to identify and eliminate permit issue backlogs within the 
OLS, under the management and with the support of the environment 
agency. 
• Due to the significant physical distance to Saba, special attention is needed 
for the daily operational aspects of executing the VTH tasks. This can be 
achieved by closely involving the current OLS permit issue officers and 
supervisors in the environment agency's execution of the tasks. 
 
Recommendation 2 (OLS) 
Address the identified bottlenecks within the administrative organisation of the OLS 
quickly and in a focused manner, in close cooperation with the environment agency. 
Part of the VTH process will continue to be executed by the OLS despite 
recommendation 1. 
• Staff and organisation: Prioritise recruitment to fill vacancies within the VTH 
process. 
• Management: Set priorities on an annual basis and link them to a concrete 
schedule of work. Perform the work and monitor progress. 
• Use of ICT: Make an unequivocal choice for support systems. Arrange 
training for the employees and focus management attention on consistent 
use of these systems. 
 
Recommendation 3 (Dutch government and OLS) 
In close coordination with the OLS, ensure up-to-date and adequate laws and 
regulations for construction, the environment and nature.  
• Specifically for construction: Evaluate the ‘Building and Housing Ordinance’ 
(OLS and Dutch government). Use the BES code to implement the functional 
requirements of the Buildings Decree and anchor this code by means of a 
Ministerial Decree. 
• Specifically for the environment: Ensure rapid entry into force of the IAB 
BES to regulate the businesses with the greatest potential environmental 
impact. The IAB BES sets out the required current and clear framework for 
programming and execution of the permit issue and supervision activities. 
The phased entry into force, as currently agreed for Saba, has led to a wait-
and-see attitude on the part of the OLS and business owners. The 
environmental impacts of business activities cannot be regulated until the 
IAB BES comes into force. 
 
Recommendation 4 (Dutch government) 
Strengthen the position of the Kingdom Representative to achieve effective 
intergovernmental supervision. 
• Establish a policy framework for the use of intergovernmental supervision 
instruments. 
Provide administrative support for the Kingdom Representative in fulfilling 
his/her intergovernmental supervision duties by appointing supervisors.  
 
  
  
Pagina 10 van 39
