3. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
A. INTRODUCTION 
Commissioned evaluation 
The joint Netherlands Antilles Security Plan (PVNA) and the Netherlands Antilles Prisons 
Programme (GWNA) were carried out over a little more than nine years. PVNA1 started in 
December 2005; The PVNA/GWNA projects could be completed until December 31, 2014. The 
Ministry of the Interior commissioned the final evaluation of the PVNA/GWNA programme. 
 
In total NAF206 million was spent on the implementation of the PVNA/GWNA projects. NAF137 
million was managed by USONA which has offices in Curaçao and Sint Maarten.  USONA 
monitored project proposals of the programme and its implementation and has provided for 
financial management. NAF 69 million was reimbursement for the cost of assistance by Dutch 
police officers and members of the Royal Military Police in the so-called ‘atrako’ team, the team 
that was formed to combat the wave of violent robberies on Curaçao. 
  
Carrying out the evaluation 
The evaluation was carried out by the Nedworc Foundation between March and October 2015. 
The evaluators were Leo Roggeveen (Project Manager), Piet van Reenen, Jan van Dijk and 
Lydeke Schakel (Quality Control). 
 
The evaluators made a comprehensive desk study. Thirty-five completed PVNA/GWNA projects 
were studied, progress reports for the committees in Curaçao and Sint Maarten, and many other 
documents. Interviews took place with 35 stakeholders and project holders on behalf of law 
enforcement institutions, with representatives of the Netherlands Ministry of the Interior for 
Curaçao and Sint Maarten, (former) Ministers of Justice on Curaçao and Sint Maarten, and the 
administrators and coordinators of the programme on behalf USONA, Project Unit Plan Safety 
and the Dutch PVNA coordinator. 
 
The findings and progress of the evaluation were regularly presented to, and discussed with, 
the Advisory Committee (AC) for the evaluation. The AC consisted of Jacques van Eck (Chair-
man), Bart Snels (Member for the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom relations), Rachel Crowe 
(Member for Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom relations), Marsie Jonkers (Dutch representa-
tive until July 2015), Rita Rahman (Dutch representative since July 2015), Lucy Tielen (Member 
for Curaçao), Peter de Witte (Member for Sint Maarten), Jeroen Thielemans (USONA repre-
sentative). 
 
B. THE PURPOSE OF THE EVALUATION 
The evaluation has two objectives 
This evaluation is intended for the Dutch Parliament (and possibly the States of Curaçao and 
Sint Maarten) so that the Parliament can form a picture of how the Netherlands Antilles Security 
Plan and the Netherlands Antilles Prisons Programme joint project, funded by the Dutch Gov-
ernment has contributed to: 
- an improvement in the security situation of all the islands of the Netherlands Antilles (NA), 
-
 the optimization of the immigration process, 
- the sustainable improvement and strengthening of the management of intended institutions, 
and 
- structurally security for personnel and detainees of the prisons in the NA in such a way that 
the prisons comply with international regulations (CPT Standards). 
 
  18
