The evaluation will be provided to the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations and the 
Ministries of Justice of Curaçao and Sint Maarten so that they are aware of the programme 
PVNA/GWNA and lessons to be learned from it in terms of both effectiveness and efficiency 
regarding: 
- the project office Plan Security and USONA 
- the long duration in three phases. 
 
C. PVNA-GWNA 
The PVNA program was developed in two parts. The first part (PVNA 1) started in December 
2005 as a response on the part of the government to the alarmingly high level of crime in 
Curaçao and Sint Maarten and the unrest this was causing.  PVNA1 had two overarching 
objectives: 
 
1. improving the security situation on all islands; 
2. sustained improvement in the operations of law enforcement. 
 
PVNA bundled a number of policy initiatives already taken by the Government of the Nether-
lands Antilles (NA) and by the Netherlands. Officers of the Royal Military Police (KMar), the 
National Police Agency (KLPD) and the Dutch Antillean police forces formed the ‘atrako team’ to 
reduce the number of robberies.  They also started joint teams for border controls in 2005. 
PVNA also put into effect the agreements between the governments of the Netherlands and the 
Netherlands Antilles that already existed in the area of law enforcement. 
 
PVNA1 ran from December 2005 to 2007. Because the strengthening of the sustainable internal 
management in the law enforcement chain took more time and money than expected PVNA1 
was followed by PVNA2 in January 2008, which was entirely dedicated to improving internal 
management.  PVNA focused on several institutions in the security chain including the Common 
Court of Justice (Court), the Public Prosecutor (OM), the Police, Prisons (GWNA) and the 
Immigration Service. PVNA2 originally had a duration of two years (2008 and 2009) but was 
eventually extended to 31 December 2011. Projects continued up to the end of 2014 although 
7
not under the name PVNA . 
 
D. ANSWERING THE EVALUATION QUESTIONS 
1.  Improving the security situation on all the islands of the Netherlands Antilles 
 
Evaluation question 
How have the projects of the Netherlands Antilles Security Plan (PVNA) and Netherlands 
Antilles Prisons Programme (GWNA), using Dutch Finance, helped to improve the security 
situation on all the islands of the Netherlands Antilles? 
 
Findings and conclusions 
The vision behind PVNA was an integral approach to safety issues on all islands. To this end 
repression, prevention, rehabilitation and self-reliance projects were formulated. The ambition 
was too great and the matching funds and the time required for implementation were lacking. 
 
Findings repression 
This project, although financed separately by the Netherlands (NAF69.3 million) is part of the 
PVNA1 programme. The security situation in Curaçao was greatly improved by the large-scale 
project ’Deployment of the Atrako Team’. The Atrako Team consisted of staff from KPC, KLPD 
and the KMar. The aim of the team was to fight the violent robberies in Curaçao. The number of 
                                            
7
 PVNA changed its name to Plan Veiligheid (Plan Safety) by 10-10-’10. 
  19
