robberies decreased from nearly 1094 in 2004 to 442 in 2008. One of the main objectives of 
PVNA1 was therefore achieved. 
 
Conclusion repression 
The deployment of the Atrako Team was very effective. The decrease in the number of rob-
beries can be largely attributed to the efforts of the Atrako Team. The results were sustainable 
over a period of almost six years. Since 2012, the number of robberies has started to rise again. 
The impact of the reduction of the number of robberies is great. On the other islands no repres-
sion projects within the PVNA programme have taken place and there are no other projects 
carried out within the repression programme. 
 
Findings prevention, rehabilitation, self-reliance 
Within the programmes for prevention, rehabilitation and self-reliance, eight projects have been 
implemented. The cost of implementation was NAF3.1 million, which is 2.3% of PVNA spending 
under the control of USONA. The stated objectives within these three programmes were not 
achieved. 
 
Conclusions prevention, rehabilitation, self-reliance 
The amount spent on these projects was very small and the objectives very large  so it must be 
concluded that the proposed integrated approach between prevention, repression (enforce-
ment), rehabilitation and self-reliance did not succeed at all. The effectiveness of the handful of 
projects implemented is limited. Regarding sustainability and impact, nothing can be said 
because of lack of information except that they will be limited compared to the original objec-
tives. 
 
 
2. Optimising the immigration process 
 
Evaluation question 
To what extent have PVNA projects, using Dutch funding, contributed to the optimisation of the 
immigration process? 
 
Findings  
The budget spent on optimising the immigration process was NAF8.5 million which is 6.2% of 
total PVNA spending managed by USONA. 
 
The aim of optimising the immigration process, which focused on the Admission Organisations 
(AO), was to develop and implement a new, transparent and responsible migration policy. There 
was also (objective PVNA2) the objective of creating a completely new organisation with trans-
parent admission and registration procedures and with global connections. 
 
The objectives were partially met (effectiveness). New AOs were created on all islands. The 
system of evaluation and processing of applications for authorisation is automated and im-
proved. The AO systems can now decide on admission or deportation, without human interven-
tion. Likewise, admission-related fraud has become difficult. Delays in processing applications 
has been eliminated. However, no common registration system was created and registration 
between the countries is not linked. 
 
The improvements were not carried out very efficiently and lack of management capacity led to 
delays. Many external staff were hired. Part of the budget is spent on the development of the 
Foreigner Management System (FMS) even though this was not one of the objectives. Sint 
Maarten is now moving away from the use of this FMS. 
 
The improvements are sustainable even though there were many personnel changes through
