external hiring and changes at the top of the organizations that threatened sustainability. Re-
garding the joint management of the software there is still no agreement between all the parties. 
 
Conclusions  
The improvement of the Admission Organizations had a clear and positive impact on the opti-
mising of the immigration process. Delays were eliminated and processing times for admission 
applications have been reduced. The quality of the handling of requests has improved with the 
aid of the automated systems. The improvements have a sustainable character. 
 
 
3. Joint Court of Justice 
 
Evaluation question 
To what extent have PVNA projects, using Dutch funding, contributed to a sustainable im-
provement and strengthening of the management of the Joint Court of Justice? 
 
Findings and conclusions 
NAF3.1 million has been spent on improvement of the operations of the Court. That is 2.2% of 
the PVNA expenditure managed by USONA. 
 
The goals were to strengthen the leadership within the Court and to improve its internal man-
agement in terms of personnel, information, organization, finance, administrative organisation 
and housing. 
 
Two projects were carried out aimed at all the above-mentioned aspects of the internal man-
agement. A personnel policy and a personnel management system were developed, an ICT 
system was set up, the housing was improved. A financial management system was introduced 
and the organizational structure was redesigned with all organisational matters placed under a 
single supervisor. 
 
All the desired results were achieved (effectiveness). Implementation took place within the 
planned time and within budget and was therefore regarded as efficient. This was mainly 
brought about by an experienced project manager familiar with law enforcement and change 
management. 
 
The results seem sustainable but are threatened by failure to make timely payments of the 
necessary contributions by the islands. 
 
It is likely that the proper functioning of the internal management of the Court has an important 
impact on the functioning of the administration of justice in the member countries. 
 
Conclusion 
The successful implementation of projects aimed at the improvement and strengthening of 
personnel, human resources management, IT, organisation, finance, management and housing 
have resulted in a sustained improvement and strengthening of internal management of the 
Joint Court of Justice. 
 
 
4. Public Prosecutors Office 
 
Evaluation question 
To what extent have PVNA projects, using Dutch funding, contributed to a sustainable im-
provement and strengthening of the management of the Public Prosecutors Office (PPO)? 
 
  21
