Findings and conclusions 
NAF3.1 million was spent on the internal management of the PPO. That is 2.2% of the PVNA 
expenditure managed by USONA. 
 
The target for the PPO was to get to a level of operations where it can perform its statutory 
duties regarding the investigation and prosecution of criminal offenses. 
 
A wide range of projects was carried out in all aspects of internal management. Human re-
source and personnel management systems were set up. A Head of Internal Management was 
appointed and employees for the HR and finance departments were recruited. The organization 
was transformed into a country structure. Curaçao, Sint Maarten and the Caribbean Nether-
lands now have their own PPO office. The prosecutors work together under one Attorney 
General. 
 
The internal management was strengthened by the executed projects (effectiveness). Internal 
management with regard to personnel, information, organization, finance, administrative organi-
sation and housing, was all taken care of. Part of the costs for improving the organisation was 
paid separately by the Dutch Government. The developed computer applications do not all 
function well (e.g. the PRIEM application) and are also not all used by the member countries. 
 
The PPO is set up efficiently. The prosecutors report to one Prosecutor General and largely 
make use of the same IT infrastructure. The project has been slightly delayed as the recruitment 
of the Head of Internal Management proved difficult. 
 
It is likely that the proper functioning of the PPO will have a major impact on the detection and 
prosecution of criminal offenses in the member countries. 
 
Conclusion 
The successful implementation of the projects aimed at the improvement and strengthening of 
personnel, human resources management, information, organization, finance, administratieve 
organisation, housing and ICT have resulted in a sustained improvement and strengthening of 
the internal management of the PPO. 
 
 
5. Police Force Curaçao 
 
Evaluation question 
To what extent have PVNA projects, using Dutch funding, contributed to the sustainable im-
provement and strengthening of the internal management of the Police Force Curaçao (KPC)? 
 
Findings and conclusions 
NAF16.8 million has been spent on the improvement of the internal management of the KPC. 
That is 12.2% of the PVNA expenses management by USONA. 
 
The overall goal for the KPC was to improve the internal management of the Corps on person-
nel, information, organisation, finance, administrative organisation and housing. 
 
The internal management of KPC has, despite of all the projects that were carried out, barely 
improved (effectiveness). There has however been progress in some areas. The housing has 
improved and internal management is now accepted as an integral part of the management of 
KPC. Achieving reasonable levels for implementation in the other areas have failed. This is 
caused by lack of resources, the  stalling of projects between 2010 and 2013, the country's 
financial problems after 10-10-‘10 up to the end of 2013 and the limited support for change 
within KPC.  
  22
