The activities were not conducted efficiently. In 2010, indications were that there was little 
overview of the internal management project. The housing project was delayed. Plans were not 
converted into actions and there was little willingness to change. The unions did not agree with 
the proposed reorganization. The implementation of the development plan did not go ahead 
until mid-2013. 
 
Sustainability of the achieved results has been a problem, mainly because of the lack of fund-
ing. The frequent changes of ministers and police management reduces the credibility of reor-
ganization initiatives. 
 
It can be assumed that the programme is not achieving the intended improvements in the 
management of the KPC, which has a negative impact on the security situation on the island. 
 
Conclusion 
Despite the large number of projects and the considerable amount spent  there is no sustained 
improvement of the internal management of KPC. 
 
6. Bonaire Police 
 
Evaluation question 
To what extent have the PVNA projects, using Dutch funding, contributed to a sustainable 
improvement and strengthening of the internal management of the Bonaire Police (KPB)? 
 
Findings and conclusions 
NAF12.5 million has been spent for the improvement of the internal management of the KPB. 
That is 9.1% of the PVNA expenses under management by USONA. 
 
Two projects were financed with PVNA resources. The first project was aimed at improving 
several specific aspects of the company's internal management and the other project goal was  
to expand the main building of KPB (NAF8 million). 
 
The internal management activities were fully realised. Also the new police station has been 
realised. The projects have therefore been shown to be effective. 
 
Regarding efficiency, the operational activities were carried out within budget, but executed with 
a delay. The construction of the new police station was not efficient. The plans were modified in 
2010 to also house the KMar and the Coast Guard. In addition, the building had to be made 
earthquake resistant which was not foreseen in the original plan. The costs of these adjust-
ments were, after 10-10-’10, paid by Netherlands. There were also additional costs for providing 
temporary housing elsewhere in connection with mold growth in the building. 
 
It is unclear what the sustainability is of the executed internal management activities. Attempts 
to interview stakeholders on this subject remained unsuccessful. In the project file no progress 
reports were included except for a report on the building activities. The sustainability of the 
police station is now in Dutch hands. There was no further research on this issue.  
 
The various services - police, coastguard and KMar - are now housed together in a new well-
equipped office which simplifies the informal support of each other's tasks. The effect on the 
security situation on Bonaire is not measurable but will be present to some extent. 
 
Conclusion 
The activities carried out for KPB related largely to the construction of the new police station 
where Coast Guard and Constabulary are also located. Housing, however, is only one of the 
  23
