elements of internal management.  Although construction of the new station was not efficiently 
implemented for a number of reasons, the result is important for Bonaire and expected to be 
sustainable. 
 
7. The Police force on Sint Maarten, Saba and St. Eustatius 
 
Evaluation question 
To what extent have the PVNA projects, using Dutch funding, contributed to a sustainable 
improvement and strengthening of the internal management of the police on St. Maarten, Saba 
and St. Eustatius? 
 
Findings and conclusions 
NAF11.2 million has been spent to improve the internal management of the police on St. Maar-
ten, Saba and St. Eustatius (KPSSS). That is 8.1% of the PVNA expenses managed by USO-
NA. 
 
The overall goal for KPSSS was to improve the internal management of the police force in all 
parts: personnel, information, organisation, finance, administrative organisation and housing. 
 
With the NAF11.2 million different projects have been carried out. Projects for the improvement 
and construction of housing for police force divisions on Saba and St. Eustatius, training for staff 
of KPSSS, a large internal management project for KPSSS, the central control room on Sint 
Maarten and integrity training for all judicial services on Sint Maarten. 
 
The intended results of all projects have largely been achieved (effectiveness). The efficiency of 
the implementation was sufficient at least as far as could be judged by the evaluators mainly 
based on various interviews. 
 
The sustainability of investments in the housing of the police on Saba and St. Eustatius is now 
in Dutch hands. Investment in training of staff and the monitoring centre in St. Maarten seem 
sustainable too. The interviews suggest that St. Maarten is able to finance the necessary 
investment themselves. The ambition to do so is there. 
 
The PVNA investment in sustainable improvement of the internal management  date from 2007. 
Based on the research conducted, the evaluators have no overview of the functioning of the 
entire internal management at KPSSS. The impact of the activities carried out on the security 
situation is probably positive but limited. 
 
Conclusion 
The carried out projects have contributed to the improvement and strengthening of the internal 
management of the police on Sint Maarten, Saba and Sint  Eustatius. The sustainability of these 
investments could not be determined. 
 
8. Organising sustainable security of the prisons on the Dutch Antilles 
 
Evaluation question 
To what extent have PVNA/GWNA projects, using Dutch funding, contributed to structural 
improvements on the security of the prisons on the Netherlands Antilles both for staff and 
inmates, taking into account international regulations (CPT standards)? 
 
Findings 
NAF44.5 million was spent on various projects for the structural improvement of the security of 
the prisons in the Netherlands Antilles. That is 32.4% of the PVNA/GWNA expenditure man-
aged by USONA. 
  24
