The objectives were: a) a sustained strengthening and improvement of the internal management 
of the prison system, so that it is sufficiently equipped for its tasks and b) completely customiz-
ing the prison and police cells on the Netherlands Antilles, according to the standards of the 
CPT. 
 
The following projects were executed: a) improvement of the management team on Curaçao 
and St. Maarten, b) construction works for the Bon Futuro prison on Curaçao c) the Governmen-
tal Reformatory Institute d) Master Project SDKK (prison on Curaçao, formerly named Bon 
Futuro) and f) Renovation of Pointe Blanche prison on Sint Maarten. 
 
In some areas, progress has been made (effectiveness). Prison buildings were built or im-
proved, internal management has been introduced as part of management and ICT programme 
is executed. Police cells on Curaçao and Bonaire are now in order as well as the House of 
Detention on Bonaire. The SDKK however proved not to be safe and does not meet the CPT 
standards. On Sint Maarten the capacity is limited: there are too many prisoners in one cell. 
Internal management projects have not resulted in better personnel policy. There are indications 
of poor work relations and demotivation of staff. Bonaire is an exception to this: it has a well-
organised and safe institution. 
 
The projects meant to structurally improve the security of the prisons have not been implement-
ed efficiently. Many projects were significant delayed due to, amongst other things, lack of 
financial resources. The effectiveness of continuing investments in the SDKK prison on Cura-
çao, rather than building a new prison, is also questioned. 
 
The long-term efforts to improve the situation in the SDKK and Pointe Blanche have not had the 
desired impact. Prisons are not sustainably safe, either for the inmates or for staff. 
 
Causes for the of lack of effectiveness and impact are: a) the available resources were not 
sufficient to meet the high ambitions (and also ambitions were unrealistic with the limited re-
sources available) and b) extensive delays. 
 
Not realising adequate CPT standards in the detention facilities at Curaçao and Sint Maarten 
must have, although not measurable, a negative impact on the security situation on the islands 
and especially for the security situation for personnel and prisoners. 
The improved police cells on Curaçao and Bonaire and the House of Detention on Bonaire have 
a positive impact on the security situation.  
 
 
Conclusions 
The sustainability of investments in the prisons in Curaçao and Sint Maarten is problematic. The 
funds necessary for new housing construction and maintenance lack. Given the current constel-
lation evaluators deem it almost impossible to make the prisons in Curaçao and Sint Maarten 
safe and to meet the CPT standards. It is assumed that the House of Detention and the police 
cells on Bonaire, Saba and Sint Eustatius will be kept on the CPT level. 
 
 
9. Project unit ‘Plan Safety’ and implementing organization USONA 
 
Evaluation question 1 
What lessons can be learned from the way of working of Project unit ‘Plan Safety’, and of the 
executive organisation USONA when executing PVNA and GWNA both in terms of effective-
ness and efficiency?
