Findings  
NAF12.5 million was spent on the Project unit ‘Plan Safety’, which is 9.1% of the PVNA-GWNA 
expenditure managed by USONA. The costs of the implementing organization USONA were not 
part of the PVNA/GWNA budget and are not assessed in this evaluation. 
 
Within the project unit ‘Plan Safety’,  two projects were carried out: a) expansion project unit 
DJZ (NAF3.9 million) and project unit ‘Plan Safety’  (NAF 8.6 million). 
 
The aim of the project unit DJZ was to strengthen the project management capacity for the law 
enforcement chain through operationalisation of a project unit within the Directorate of Judicial 
Affairs Ministry of Justice Netherlands Antilles both for PVNA 1 and 2. For the period after the 
10-10-’10 project unit  ‘Plan Safety’ was established with similar objectives. 
 
The project unit ’Plan Safety’ and DJZ have pragmatically and effectively carried out various 
activities for the benefit of the law enforcement institutions, when it appeared that these institu-
tions itself had no capacity or were lacking the financial resources to do so. These activities 
included a) formulating project proposals, b) helping to evaluate the project proposals and c)  
implementing parts of the project proposals. Especially in the areas of housing, temporary 
management and ICT big steps have been taken. 
 
However a number of projects were also identified which did not correspond (lack of effective-
ness) to the needs of the institutions or of the islands. Examples include the ICT-project RIEC, 
the security plans developed for each island and parts of the ICT-project developed for St. 
Maarten. 
 
The role of USONA consisted of assessing the project applications submitted by the project unit. 
On behalf of the Netherlands, USONA made resources available for project implementation, 
held financial supervision over the PVNA/GWNA  projects and monitored whether objectives of 
projects were achieved. 
 
The role of USONA in the PVNA/GWNA programme was on the whole efficient and effective. 
USONA was created in 2004 to counter the under-utilisation of development funds in the 
Netherlands Antilles and to ensure de-politicisation and de-bureaucratisation of the project 
implementation. In 2007 and 2011 the Evaluatiegroep concluded that USONA succeeded in 
doing this. In the execution of the PVNA/GWNA programme, USONA has countered under-
spending, de-politicisation and de-bureaucratisation. Programme steering for PVNA was done 
by the Netherlands and the country NA together. USONA’s task was to examine the projects in 
this programme. This task they performed well. USONA was also responsible for ex-ante 
assessment, monitoring the legitimacy of expenditures and performance monitoring. The 
interviews revealed that the quality of PVNA project proposals improved with the input of USO-
NA. Moreover, most stakeholders interviewed indicated that USONA, in monitoring the imple-
mentation of the projects, has played a good role. The fact that Curaçao has transferred budget 
management and project administration of several major security projects to USONA supports 
this finding. The pragmatic approach by USONA, in the last phase of the PVNA programme, has 
contributed to the fact that much of the remaining budget could still be used. 
 
The Dutch coordinator PVNA 
Next to Project office PVNA and USONA, there was a Dutch PVNA coordinator. The coordinator 
was secretary of the Ministerial Steering Group (MSG). Projects could be taken into considera-
tion by USONA only if they had been approved by the Dutch coordinator. Besides he had the 
task of, although more remotely, monitor the progress and the quality of the projects. He also 
had an advisory and stimulating role. The coordinator had good formal and informal contacts 
and a vast knowledge of law enforcement. 
 
  26
