Conclusions 
The project unit ’Plan Safety’ and DJZ have pragmatically and effectively carried out various 
activities for the benefit of the law enforcement institutions, when it appeared that these institu-
tions itself had no capacity or were lacking the financial resources to do so. These activities 
included a) formulating project proposals, b) helping to evaluate the project proposals and c)  
implementing parts of the project proposals. 
 
Implementing organisation USONA has effectively and efficiently carried out is activities. These 
activities included a) testing the submitted projects to the PVNA program, b) ex-ante assess-
ment of the project design, c) ensuring legality of projects costs and d) monitoring of implemen-
tation of the projects. 
 
Lessons learned 
- By using a special political steered project office  for PVNA / GWNA in addition to the 
existing executive agency USONA  strength emerged in the formulation and implementation 
of projects for the institutions of the law enforcement chain. This has led to the implementa-
tion of many projects which would otherwise not have be realized. 
- By having project proposals formulated by the project office PVNA, the projects did  not 
always match with wishes and needs of the recipient institutions. 
- USONA has played a good role, in the PVNA program, when it comes to countering under-
utilisation of available budgets and the de-politicisation and de-bureaucratisation of the pro-
ject implementation. 
- Both the project office PVNA  and USONA had tasks in the supervision of the projects. This 
led to discussions and delays  on the one hand, but also to better proposals and projects. 
- Reporting on the projects by the project owners is often limited. Negative findings are not 
always recorded. The project files can therefore give an incomplete picture. Investing in 
training for reporting by project owners is important. 
 
 
Evaluation Question 2 
What lessons can be learned from the way of working of project unit  ‘Plan Safety’, and execu-
tive organisation USONA when executing PVNA and GWNA in the three phases? 
 
Findings and conclusions 
Continuity by individuals and institutions 
Ex-ante evaluation of projects, monitoring of legitimacy and monitoring of implementation took 
place throughout the whole period by USONA. There was great continuity in USONA employees 
and managers throughout the entire period. 
 
The project unit DJZ/project unit PVNA  was named project unit ’Plan Safety’ after 10-10-’10. 
During the three phases (PVNA1, PVNA2 and period from 2012 to end of 2014) the most 
essential functions, the programme manager and the IT specialist were filled by the same 
persons. 
 
Even now, during the evaluation and completion period for PVNA, there is continuity in both 
USONA, and also by the continued activities of former PVNA programme manager at USONA, 
the former programme manager of project ’Plan Safety’ and the ICT specialist. 
 
Without this continuity in institutions and perseverance by the persons concerned, law enforce-
ment in the Netherlands Antilles would definitely have been in worse shape. 
 
 
  27
