BELGIUM 
 
30-03-2007 
This signature is equally binding on the French community, the Flemish community, the German-
speaking community, the Wallone region, the Flemisch region and the region of the capital-
Brussels. 
 
CANADA 
 
11-03-2010 
Canada recognises that persons with disabilities are presumed to have legal capacity on an equal 
basis with others in all aspects of their lives. Canada declares its understanding that Article 12 
permits supported and substitute decision-making arrangements in appropriate circumstances and 
in accordance with the law. 
To the extent Article 12 may be interpreted as requiring the elimination of all substitute decision-
making arrangements, Canada reserves the right to continue their use in appropriate 
circumstances and subject to appropriate and effective safeguards. With respect to Article 12 (4), 
Canada reserves the right not to subject all such measures to regular review by an independent 
authority, where such measures are already subject to review or appeal. 
Canada interprets Article 33 (2) as accommodating the situation of federal states where the 
implementation of the Convention will occur at more than one level of government and through a 
variety of mechanisms, including existing ones. 
 
14-05-2014 
The Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and has the honour to refer to the Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities, and the Secretary-General's communication of 9 April 2014, numbered 
C.N.186.2014.TREATIES-IV.15, relating to that treaty. 
The Permanent Mission of Canada notes that this communication was made pursuant to the 
Secretary General's capacity as Depositary for the Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities. The Permanent Mission of Canada notes the technical and administrative role of the 
Depositary, and that it is for States Parties to a treaty, not the Depositary, to make their own 
determination with respect to any legal issues raised by instruments circulated by a depositary. 
In that context, the Permanent Mission of Canada notes that 'Palestine' does not meet the criteria 
of a state under international law and is not recognized by Canada as a state. Therefore, in order 
to avoid confusion, the Permanent Mission of Canada wishes to note its position that in the context 
of the purported Palestinian accession to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 
'Palestine' is not able to accede to this convention, and that the Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities does not enter into force, or have an effect on Canada's treaty relations, 
with respect to the 'State of Palestine'. 
 
CHINA 
 
01-08-2008 
The application of the provisions regarding liberty of movement and nationality of the Convention 
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the 
People’s Republic of China, shall not change the validity of relevant laws on immigration control 
and nationality application of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic 
of China. 
 
CYPRUS 
 
27-06-2011 
Whereas the Persons with Disabilities Law, as this has been harmonized with the Council Directive 
2000/78/EC of 27 November 2000 establishing a general framework for equal treatment in 
employment and occupation, prescribes in section 3A thereof that the said Law shall not apply as 
regards employment:
