Article 44(1) of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
(hereinafter referred to as the 'Convention') provides that a regional integration organisation in its 
instrument of formal confirmation or accession is to declare the extent of its competence with 
respect to matters governed by the Convention. 
The current members of the European Community are the Kingdom of Belgium, the Republic of 
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, the Kingdom of Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, the 
Republic of Estonia, the Hellenic Republic, the Kingdom of Spain, the French Republic, Ireland, the 
Italian Republic, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the 
Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Kingdom of the 
Netherlands, the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Poland, the Portuguese Republic, Romania, 
the Republic of Slovenia, the Slovak Republic, the Republic of Finland, the Kingdom of Sweden and 
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 
The European Community notes that for the purpose of the Convention, the term 'State Parties' 
applies to regional integration organisations within the limits of their competence. 
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities shall apply, with regard to 
the competence of the European Community, to the territories in which the Treaty establishing the 
European Community is applied and under the conditions laid down in that Treaty, in particular 
Article 299 thereof. 
Pursuant to Article 299, this Declaration is not applicable to the territories of the Member States in 
which the said Treaty does not apply and is without prejudice to such act or positions as may be 
adopted under the Convention by Member States concerned on behalf and in the interests of those 
territories. 
In accordance with Article 44(1) of the Convention, this Declaration indicates the competences 
transferred to the Community by the Member States under the Treaty establishing the European 
Community, in the areas covered by the Convention. 
The scope and the exercise of Community competence are, by their nature, subject to continuous 
development and the Community will complete or amend this Declaration, if necessary, in 
accordance with Article 44(1) of the Convention. 
In some matters the European Community has exclusive competence and in other matters 
competence is shared between the European Community and the Member States. The Member 
States remain competent for all matters in respect of which no competence has been transferred to 
the European Community. 
At present: 
1. The Community has exclusive competence as regards the compatibility of state aid with the 
common market and the common custom tariff. 
To the extent that provisions of Community law are affected by the provision of the Convention, 
the European Community has an exclusive competence to accept such obligations with respect to 
its own public administration. In this regard, the Community declares that it has power to deal with 
regulating the recruitment, conditions of service, remuneration, training etc. of non-elected officials 
under the Staff Regulations and the implementing rules to those Regulations. 1) 
2. The Community shares competence with Member States as regards action to combat 
discrimination on the ground of disability, free movement of goods, persons, services and capital 
agriculture, transport by rail, road, sea and air transport, taxation, internal market, equal pay for 
male and female workers, Trans-European network policy and statistics. 
The European Community has exclusive competence to enter into this Convention in respect of 
those matters only to the extent that provisions of the Convention or legal instruments adopted in 
implementation thereof affect common rules previously established by the European Community. 
When Community rules exist but are not affected, in particular in cases of Community provisions 
establishing only minimum standards, the Member States have competence, without prejudice to 
the competence of the European Community to act in this field. Otherwise competence rests with 
the Member States. A list of relevant acts adopted by the European Community appears in the 
Appendix hereto 2). The extent of the European Community's competence ensuing from these acts 
must be assessed by reference to the precise provisions of each measure, and in particular, the 
extent to which these provisions establish common rules. 
3. The following EC policies may also be relevant to the UN Convention: Member States and the 
Community shall work towards developing a coordinated strategy for employment. The Community 
shall contribute to the development of quality of education by encouraging cooperation between 
Member States and, if necessary, by supporting and supplementing their action. The Community 
23
