shall implement a vocational training policy which shall support and supplement the action of the 
Member States. In order to promote its overall harmonious development, the Community shall 
develop and pursue its actions leading to the strengthening of its economic and social cohesion. 
The Community conducts a development cooperation policy and economic, financial and technical 
cooperation with third countries without prejudice to the respective competences of the Member 
States. 
_______________ 
1) Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom, ECSC) No 259/68 of 29 February 1968 laying down the Staff 
Regulations of officials of the European Communities and the Conditions of Employment of other 
servants of the European Communities (OJ L 56, 4.3.1968, p. 1). 
2) Depository Notification C.N. 860.2010. 
 
FRANCE 
 
18-02-2010 
The French Republic declares that it will interpret the term "consent" in article 15 of the Convention 
in conformity with international instruments, in particular those that relate to human rights and 
biomedicine, and with national legislation, which is in line with these instruments. This means that, 
as far as biomedical research is concerned, the term "consent" applies to two different situations: 
1. Consent given by a person who is able to consent, and 
2. In the case of persons who are not able to give their consent, permission given by their 
representative or an authority or body provided for by law. 
The French Republic considers it important that persons who are unable to give their free and 
informed consent receive specific protection, without prejudice to all medical research of benefit to 
them. In addition to the permission referred to under paragraph 2 above, other protective 
measures, such as those included in the above-mentioned international instruments, are 
considered to be part of this protection. 
With regard to article 29 of the Convention, the exercise of the right to vote is a component of 
legal capacity that may not be restricted except in the conditions and in accordance with the 
modalities provided for in article 12 of the Convention. 
 
GEORGIA 
 
13-03-2014 
Georgia interprets article 12 of the Convention in conjunction with respective provisions of other 
international human rights instruments and its domestic law and will therefore interpret its 
provisions in a way conferring the highest legal protection for safeguarding dignity, physical, 
psychological and emotional integrity of persons and ensuring integrity of their property. 
 
GREECE 
 
31-05-2012 
The provisions of Article 27 paragraph 1 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
shall not apply with respect to employment and occupation in the armed and security forces in so 
far as it relates to a difference of treatment on grounds of disability concerning the service thereto, 
as provided in Article 8 paragraph 4 of the Law 3304/2005 for the implementation of the principle 
of equal treatment, adopted pursuant to Articles 3 paragraph 4 and 4 of the Council Directive 
2000/78/EC of 27 November 2000 establishing a general framework for equal treatment in 
employment and occupation. 
 
GUATEMALA 
 
07-04-2009 
In accordance with article 33 of the Convention and by Decree No. 78-2009, it has been agreed to 
designate the National Council for te care of Persons with Disabilties (CONADI) as the government 
agency responsible for addressing issues relating to compliance with and implementation of the 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and for producing the reports required under 
that Convention. 
24
