LITHUANIA 
 
18-08-2010 
.... the Republic of Lithuania declares that the concept of "sexual and reproductive health" used in 
Article 25(a) of the Convention shall not be interpreted to establish new human rights and create 
relevant international commitments of the Republic of Lithuania. The legal content of this concept 
does not include support, encouragement or promotion of pregnancy termination, sterilization and 
medical procedures of persons with disabilities, able to cause discrimination on the grounds of 
genetic features. 
 
MALAYSIA 
 
19-07-2010 
Malaysia acknowledges that the principles of non-discrimination and equality of opportunity as 
provided in articles 3 (b), 3 (e) and 5 (2) of the said Convention are vital in ensuring full and equal 
enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities, and to 
promote respect for their inherent dignity, which shall be applied and interpreted on the basis of 
disability and on equal basis with others. Malaysia declares that its application and interpretation of 
the Federal Constitution of Malaysia pertaining to the principles of non-discrimination and equality 
of opportunity shall not be treated as contravening articles 3 (b), 3 (e) and 5 (2) of the said 
Convention. 
Malaysia recognizes the participation of persons with disabilities in cultural life, recreation and 
leisure as provided in article 30 of the said Convention and interprets that the recognition is a 
matter for national legislation. 
The Government of Malaysia ratifies the said Convention subject to the reservation that it does not 
consider itself bound by articles 15 and 18 of the said Convention. 
24-06-2011 - Objection by Austria 
28-06-2011 - Objection by Belgium 
03-08-2011 - Objection by Germany 
01-08-2011 - Objection by Hungary 
26-07-2011 - Objection by Portugal 
18-07-2011 - Objection by Slovakia 
06-07-2011 - Objection by Sweden 
15-04-2014 - Objection by Switzerland 
 
MALTA 
 
10-10-2012 
[...] Pursuant to Article 25 of the Convention, Malta makes the following Interpretative Statement - 
Malta understands that the phrase "sexual and reproductive health" in Art 25 (a) of the Convention 
does not constitute recognition of any new international law obligation, does not create any 
abortion rights, and cannot be interpreted to constitute support, endorsement, or promotion of 
abortion. Malta further understands that the use of this phrase is intended exclusively to underline 
the point that where health services are provided, they are provided without discrimination on the 
basis of disability. 
Malta's national legislation considers the termination of pregnancy through induced abortion as 
illegal. 
[...] Pursuant to Article 29 (a) (i) and (iii) of the Convention, while the Government of Malta is fully 
committed to ensure the effective and full participation of persons with disabilities in political and 
public life, including the exercise of their right to vote by secret ballot in elections and referenda, 
and to stand for elections, Malta makes the following reservations: 
With regard to (a) (i): 
Malta reserves the right to continue to apply its current electoral legislation in so far as voting 
procedures, facilities and materials are concerned. 
With regard to (a) (iii): 
Malta reserves the right to continue to apply its current electoral legislation in so far as assistance 
in voting procedures is concerned. 
 
26
