MAURITIUS 
 
25-09-2007 
The Government of the Republic of Mauritius makes the following reservations in relation to Article 
11 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities which pertains to 
situations of risk and humanitarian emergencies. 
The Government of Mauritius signs the present Convention subject to the reservation that it does 
not consider itself bound to take measures specified in article 11 unless permitted by domestic 
legislation expressly providing for the taking of such measures. 
08-01-2010 
The Republic of Mauritius declares that it shall not for the time being take any of the measures 
provided for in Articles 9.2 (d) and (e) in view of their heavy financial implication. 
With regard to Article 24.2 (b), the Republic of Mauritius has a policy of inclusive education which is 
being implemented incrementally alongside special education. 
 
MEXICO 
 
17-12-2007 
The Political Constitution of the United Mexican States, in its articIe 1, establishes that: "( ... ) any 
discrimination on the grounds of ethnic or national origin, gender, age, disability, social status, 
health, religion opinion, preference, civil status or any other form of discrimination that is an 
affront to human dignity and is intended to deny or undermine the rights and freedoms of persons 
is prohibited". 
In ratifying this Convention, the United Mexican States reaffirms its commitment to promoting and 
protecting the rights of Mexicans who suffer any disability, whether they are within the national 
territory or abroad. 
The Mexican State reiterates its firm commitment to creating conditions that allow all individuals to 
develop in a holistic manner and to exercise their rights and freedoms fully and without 
discrimination. 
Accordingly, affirming its absolute determination to protect the rights and dignity of persons with 
disabilities, the United Mexican States interprets paragraph 2 of article 12 of the Convention to 
mean that in the case of conflict between that paragraph and national legislation, the provision that 
confers the greatest legal protection while safeguarding the dignity and ensuring the physical, 
psychological and emotional integrity of persons and protecting the integrity of their property shall 
apply, in strict accordance with the principle pro homine. 
03-01-2012 
Withdrawal of interpretative declaration. 
 
MONACO 
 
23-09-2009 
The Government of His Serene Highness the Prince of Monaco declares that implementation of the 
Convention must take into account the unique features of the Principality of Monaco, particularly 
the small size of its territory and the needs of its people. 
The Government of His Serene Highness the Prince of Monaco considers that articles 23 and 25 of 
the Convention must not be interpreted as recognizing an individual right to abortion except where 
expressly provided for under national law. 
The Government of His Serene Highness the Prince of Monaco considers that the purpose of the 
Convention is to eliminate all discrimination on the basis of disability and to ensure that persons 
with disabilities have full enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms on an equal 
basis with others, but that the Convention does not imply that persons with disabilities should be 
afforded rights superior to those afforded to persons without disabilities, especially in terms of 
employment, accommodation and nationality. 
 
 
 
 
 
27
