NETHERLANDS, THE KINGDOM OF THE 
 
30-03-2007 
The Kingdom of the Netherlands hereby expresses its intention to ratify the Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, subject to the following declarations and such further 
declarations and reservations as it may deem necessary upon ratification of the Convention. 
Article 10 
The Kingdom of the Netherlands acknowledges that unborn human life is worthy of protection. The 
Kingdom interprets the scope of Article 10 to the effect that such protection - and thereby the term 
'human being'- is a matter for national legislation. 
Article 15 
The Netherlands declares that it will interpret the term 'consent' in Article 15 in conformity with 
international instruments, such as the Council of Europe Convention on Human Rights and 
Biomedicine and the Additional Protocol concerning Biomedical Research, and with national 
legislation which is in line with these instruments. This means that, as far as biomedical research is 
concerned, that term 'consent' applies to two different situations: 
1. consent given by a person who is able to consent, and 
2. in the case of persons who are not able to give their consent, permission given by their 
representative or an authority or body provided for by law.  
The Netherlands considers it important that persons who are unable to give their free and informed 
consent receive specific protection. In addition to the permission referred to under 2. above, other 
protective measures as included in the above-mentioned international instruments are considered 
to be part of this protection.  
Article 23 
With regard to Article 23 paragraph 1(b), the Netherlands declares that the best interests of the 
child shall be paramount.  
Article 25 
The individual autonomy of the person is an important principle laid down in Article 3 (a) of the 
Convention. The Netherlands understands Article 25(f) in the light of this autonomy. This provision 
is interpreted to mean that good care involves respecting a person's wishes with regard to medical 
treatment, food and fluids. 
 
NEW ZEALAND 
 
25-09-2008 
...consistent with the constitutional status of Tokelau and taking into account the commitment of 
the Government of New Zealand to the development of self-government for Tokelau through an act 
of self-determination under the Charter of the United Nations, this ratification shall not extend to 
Tokelau unless and until a Declaration to this effect is lodged by the Government of New Zealand 
with the Depositary on the basis of appropriate consultation with that territory. 
 
NORWAY 
 
03-06-2013 
Article 12 
Norway recognises that persons with disabilities enjoy legal capacity on an equal basis with others 
in all aspects of life. Norway also recognizes its obligations to take appropriate measures to provide 
access by persons with disabilities to the support they may require in exercising their legal 
capacity. Furthermore, Norway declares its understanding that the Convention allows for the 
withdrawal of legal capacity or support in exercising legal capacity, and/or compulsory 
guardianship, in cases where such measures are necessary, as a last resort and subject to 
safeguards. 
Articles 14 and 25 
Norway recognises that all persons with disabilities enjoy the right to liberty and security of person, 
and a right to respect for physical and mental integrity on an equal basis with others. Furthermore, 
Norway declares its understanding that the Convention allows for compulsory care or treatment of 
persons, including measures to treat mental illnesses, when circumstances render treatment of this 
kind necessary as a last resort, and the treatment is subject to legal safeguards.
