PALESTINE 
 
06-06-2014 
The Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine to the United Nations presents his compliments 
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in his capacity as Depositary, and has the honor to 
refer to depositary notification C.N.299.2014.TREATIES-IV.15, dated 22 May 2014, conveying a 
communication of Israel regarding the accession of the State of Palestine to the Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, dated 13 December 2006. 
The Government of the State of Palestine regrets the position of Israel, the occupying Power, and 
wishes to recall United Nations General Assembly resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012 according 
Palestine 'non-member observer State status in the United Nations'. In this regard, Palestine is a 
State recognized by the United Nations General Assembly on behalf of the international 
community. 
As a State Party to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which entered into 
force on 2 May 2014, the State of Palestine will exercise its rights and honor its obligations with 
respect to all States Parties. The State of Palestine trusts that its rights and obligations will be 
equally respected by its fellow States Parties. 
 
06-06-2014 
The Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine to the United Nations presents his compliments 
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in his capacity as Depositary, and has the honor to 
refer to depositary notification C.N.281.2014.TREATIES-IV.15, dated 22 May 2014, conveying a 
communication of Canada regarding the accession of the State of Palestine to the Convention on 
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, dated 13 December 2006. 
The Government of the State of Palestine regrets the position of Canada and wishes to recall 
United Nations General Assembly resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012 according Palestine "non-
member observer State status in the United Nations". In this regard, Palestine is a State 
recognized by the United Nations General Assembly on behalf of the international community. 
As a State Party to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which entered into 
force on 2 May 2014, the State of Palestine will exercise its rights and honor its obligations with 
respect to all States Parties. The State of Palestine trusts that its rights and obligations will be 
equally respected by its fellow States Parties. 
 
POLAND 
 
30-03-2007 
The Republic of Poland understands that Articles 23. 1 (b) and 25 (a) shall not be interpreted in a 
way conferring an individual right to abortion or mandating state party to provide acces thereto. 
25-09-2012 
The Republic of Poland understands that Article 23.1 (b) and Article 25 (a) shall not be interpreted 
in a way conferring an individual right to abortion or mandating state party to provide access 
thereto, unless that right is guaranteed by the national law. 
Article 23.1(a) of the Convention refers to the recognition of the right of all persons with disabilities 
who are of marriageable age to marry and to found a family on the basis of free and full consent of 
the intending spouses. By virtue of Article 46 of the Convention the Republic of Poland reserves the 
right not to apply Article 23.1(a) of the Convention until relevant domestic legislation is amended. 
Until the withdrawal of the reservation a disabled person whose disability results from a mental 
illness or mental disability and who is of marriageable age, can not get married without the court's 
approval based on the statement that the health or mental condition of that person does not 
jeopardize the marriage, nor the health of prospective children and on condition that such a person 
has not been fully incapacitated. These conditions result from Article 12 ยง 1 of the Polish Code on 
Family and Guardianship (Journal of Laws of the Republic of Poland of 1964, No. 9, item 59, with 
subsequent amendments). 
The Republic of Poland declares that it will interpret Article 12 of the Convention in a way allowing 
the application of the incapacitation, in the circumstances and in the manner set forth in the 
domestic law, as a measure indicated in Article 12.4, when a person suffering from a mental 
illness, mental disability or other mental disorder is unable to control his or her conduct. 
 
29
