Modernize social SZW • Preparation and • In the third quarter of 2022 stakeholders in the Caribbean Netherlands have been 
security system consultation for drawing consulted in order to provide input for shaping the arrangements. Based upon this 
up an unemployment input, the ministry of SZW will draw up a policy memorandum. 
scheme.  
• Preparing an arrangement  
in case an employee 
travels abroad with a sick 
relative/in the event of a 
medical referral. 
Reducing the  SZW/OCW • No specific realization for • The subsidies for child care have been increased in January 2022 with 10%, and in 
cost for childcare 2022 July 2022 again with 10%. With this extra subsidy child care organizations can 
enhance the quality of child care.  
• An additional subsidy has been granted for babies after child care organizations 
reported that the costs for care of babies were much higher than for toddlers.   
• The law proposal ‘Child care’ will be sent to the Parliament in the beginning of 
2023. The law proposal has been adjusted because of the ‘coalitieakkoord’ and the 
advice of de Raad van State. 
• As of 1 January 2023 the subsidies for childcare have been increased with 33,8% 
for the daycare and with 20% for the afterschool care. 
• The parental fee will decrease with $25 for the daycare and $10 for the afterschool 
care.  
• In 2022 OLS has continued to improve the quality of Childcare especially in the 
area of housing and education of staff. We have also reduced the cost for parents 
using childcare. 
Social workplace SZW, OLS • Funding towards OLS for • On 12 November, the Minister has signed a specific allowance (“bijzondere 
and initiatives for the social workplace (The uitkering”) to support the Public Entity of Saba on a number of initiatives in the 
those with a Garden). social domain, including the social workplace. 
distance to the • This action was completed. 
labor market 
Task ‘’bijzondere SZW, OLS • The Island Council • In the last Island Council meeting of 2022 this ordinance was approved. SZW and 
onderstand’’ approves the new Saba OLS will make an agreement on the transfer of the task three months after the 
ordinance. With that the publication of the ordinance. This includes the transfer of the budget and structural 
relevant SZW budget goes budget for capacity within the OLS. 
to OLS, together with 
budget for 1 extra fte at 
OLS to e.g. execute the 
extraordinary benefit).  
Poverty policy OLS, SZW • It is an ongoing activity • With the specific allowance, mentioned above, budget has also been made available 
to implement the to enable the Community Development Department to continue implementing the 
poverty policy (which poverty policy. 
was mentioned in the • This is an ongoing process. 
Saba Package 1.0).  
Execution is based on a 
mix of local and national 
budgets.
