Abuse, domestic OLS, VWS • No specific realization for • The actions as agreed upon concerning domestic violence and abuse are admitted 
violence and abuse  2022 in and financed through the Bestuursakkoord aanpak huiselijk geweld en 
 kindermishandeling BES. 
• This process is ongoing. A plan is being made through the domestic violence 
coordinator and OLS, along with the planning bureau. This temporary shelter is a 
realization in 2023. 
 
2. A healthy society and well-being 
Action Saba Package Responsibility Planned realization 2022 Progress and comments 
2.0 
Infectious disease OLS, VWS • Ongoing investigation into • Concerns a continuous task of the GGD. Vaccinations against MPOX and COVID are 
control improving matters available, as well as COVID-testing and research concerning infectious disease  
concerning infectious • OLS continues to monitor the covid situation and the head of OLS public health 
disease control. department meets bi weekly with the RIVM in the continued monitoring and response 
to covid including sequencing of positive tests to determine variants. These samples are 
sent to the RIVM in the Netherlands. During those meetings it is discussed with broader 
infectious disease topics. 
• OLS head of Public health department is now part of the RIVM working group for the 
development of RIVM Caribbean hub. The prospect of this hub was an agreement in last 
year’s 4 country meeting in Aruba and the project plan will be presented in this year’s 4 
country meeting. The idea with this hub is to have a base for capacity building, 
expertise and education available to the islands. 
• Regarding food safety (linked to gastrointestinal infectious disease), together with 
multiple other departments, OLS public health is brainstorming the introduction of a 
policy and proper process and procedures. We will focus on training for food handlers, 
especially hand hygiene and the process involved in securing a food handlers card and 
vendors license.control. 
AMvB OLS, VWS • Evaluate the support that • At this moment, the internetconsultation for the AMvB Maatschappelijke Ondersteuning 
st
Maatschappleijke  is offered and the need is happening, in order for the AMvB to come into effect on januari 1 , 2024. 
Ondersteuning(Legal for further development. • Awaiting update from social department at OLS 
foundation for social 
development) 
 
3. Unleash (potential) talents 
Action Saba Responsibility Planned realization 2022 Progress and comments 
Package 2.0 
Job placement SZW, OLS • Recruitment of (youth) job • With the above mentioned specific allowance op the Ministry of SZW, budget has been 
consultant; job programs allocated to the Public Entity to strengthen its efforts to match labor market needs and 
potential. The Public Entity will need to decide on the specific allocation of funding. This 
is something that will be monitored and discussed in the course of 2023. 
• Awaiting update from social department at OLS 
4
