Master plan (early OLS, OCW • Renovation of the primary • Reorganized and reinforced Directorate of Infrastructure started working on the 
childhood) has school started, first programme of requirements for SCS, sufficient funding needs to be found` 
education related building will be finished May • Ongoing. OLS has started the expansion and renovation project of the primary school 
buildings 2023 for kindergarten classes. OLS also purchased property to start childcare housing in 
2023. 
Education and OCW, OLS Start implementing these • A collaboration within the hospitality-sector has been realized with NIPA. The 
labor market measures: collaboration aims to establish training for students and professionals. 
initiatives 1) Collaboration in hospitality  • A collaboration in education within the health domain has not yet been realized, it is 
2) Exchange programs for necessary to wait for the establishment of a consortium of mbo-schools in the European 
students, teachers  Netherlands. 
3)  Collaboration in education • ROA is responsible for the research. OLS is involved in this process. 
within the health domain  • With the above mentioned specific allowance, funding has been made available to the 
4) Boost vocational education Public Entity to strengthen its efforts to match labor market needs and potential, 
and education of assistant including by offering training to young people.  
teachers.  
5) Invest in stages.  
6) Skills Enhancement Program 
for the development of technical 
skills. 
Culture OLS • Culture policy plan agenda is • The culture policy plan has been completed and awaiting final approval through the 
drafted. Island Council and BC. 
 
Theme 2: Economic and spatial development 
4. Reducing the cost of doing business, diversifying the economy, sustaining tourism 
Action Saba Package Responsibility Planned realization 2022 Progress and comments 
2.0 
Decreasing price of EZK • Agreements between • EZK provides a subsidy to reduce the costs of fixed internet subscriptions for the end 
telecom telecom providers user. 
concerning passing on the • This is completed. Every month all customers receive a reduction in their cost.  
subsidy to customers. 
High level Task force FIN, JenV, EZK, • Start the Taskforce 
• The Taskforce has been up and running since October 2022. As requested by the public 
‘Solutions for Saba’s SZW, BZK en • Tangible results of the 
entities – who play a central part in taskforce - it has been working on the following 
high cost of doing zo nodig topics mentioned: 
topics:  
business’ andere • Banking service; 
1. BSN  
 partijen. • Notary; 
2. Postal Codes 
• Customs and 
3. Banking services 
brokers matters; 
4. Notarial serviecs 
• Immigration/border 
5. Competing claims on land 
control, IND and 
6. Economic diversification 
work permits 
7. Digitization  
issues; 
• Mail service, lack of 8. Work- and residence permits
