ZIP code; 9. Movement of people and goods 
• Import and export 
• As it currently stands, actions are being deployed to work on all bottlenecks. Notably on 
regulations 
the first 5 subjects in the list above we have seen considerable progress, as these were 
• Tax issues. 
considered most pressing and were therefore prioritized. 
• The taskforce will provide a full progress report in the summer of 2023.   
Executing Tourism OLS • The Tourism Master plan • This is completed. 
Master Plan for Saba is available 
Telecommunication OLS • An organization to audit • This is still pending. The BC has to make a decision on this.  
Satel has been selected. 
 
5. Continuous development of infrastructure, spatial planning and water management 
Action Saba Package Responsibility Planned realization 2022 Progress and comments 
2.0 
Reducing the cost of IenW, OLS • Reduced prices of bottled • OLS is responsible for pricing the bottled drinking water according to the granted 
drinking water drinking water compared to subsidies.  
 their cost price.  • In 2021 a total of €0,168 mln. has been granted by the ministry of IenW which can be 
used for subsidizing bottled drinking water (for the years 2021/2022).  
• Moreover, the ministry of IenW has agreed upon a total of €1,1 in subsidies to be 
granted to the OLS in 2022, for reducing the price of drinking water and investments in 
reverse osmosis water. 
• This is has been done and a structural subsidy of 168k EUR has been made available 
for lowering the cost of drinking water. 
Improve connectivity PSO: IenW • PSO: IenW to perform a • This was announced in different articles. IenW has been monitoring and working on 
and a sustainable air study into the possibilities this. 
 
connection of offering reliable flight 
Ferry: OLS en 
connections for residents 
OLE 
(for example, via PSO). 
OLS • Draw up a multi-year • In progress. Awaiting report 
Long-term 
maintenance of maintenance program for 
airport the airport.  
infrastructure and 
compliance with 
safety 
requirements. 
Construction of a OLS Perform the tender and • The economic impact assessment study was put on hold as the company needed 
safe and hurricane- economic impact assessment information which was being gathered for the Saba Tourism Master Plan. Now that the 
for the harbor plan is completed it is expected that the EIS will be finalized first half of 2023. 
ready harbor(s) 
 
• The economic impact 
assessment study is 
done 
6
