Housing BZK/OLS Saba’s ambitions will be • The ‘Beleidsagenda’ has been be published in January 2023. To implement this policy 
implementation specified concretely and agenda, a steering group and task force will be created in 2023. The steering group will 
agenda measurably within the formulate an implementation framework in 2023, which offers ample space to further 
framework of the specify Saba’s ambitions for housing.    
‘Beleidsagenda • In 2022, BZK/VRO formulated the ‘Policy agenda housing and spatial development for 
Volkshuisvesting and the Caribbean Netherlands’. OLS provided input by means of: a position paper, 
Ruimtelijke Ordening Caribisch discussions during Minister De Jonge’s visit to the island in June 2022 and feedback on 
Nederland.’ The goal of this draft versions of the policy agenda. The policy agenda has been be presented end of 
agenda is to create the right January 2023. 
preconditions to make housing • Subsequently, OLS will translate the goals/ambitions mentioned in the policy agenda to 
more available and affordable.  an island-specific action plan with priorities and the right approach for Saba. 
 • Installation of the Rent Committee (Huurcommissie) has not taken place yet, but is one 
of the goals described in the policy agenda. 
BZK/VRO • OLS gives input for the • In the first half of 2022 we have explored the topics the spatial development program 
Spatial planning 
spatial planning should contain. The result of that was an outline that I have shared with the colleagues 
framework that BZK is on the islands. Saba reacted to that outline. 
working on • In 2022, BZK/VRO has initiated the process of establishing a spatial development 
programme for the Caribbean Netherlands. The spatial development programme 
relates to national interest in the field of spatial planning and covers all three islands. 
• As a first step, BZK outlined, with input of OLS, what this programme could entail. 
• In November 2022, Wolfs Company and Rho adviseurs were selected by BZK to draw 
up the spatial development programme. BZK has introduced OLS and the companies 
and the consultants presented the goals and planning of their assignment. 
• In January 2023 BZK/VRO and Rho adviseurs will visit Saba to discuss: the relevant 
spatial development themes on Saba; the desired role of the national government and 
how this should be included in the spatial development programme. 
• A first draft should be ready in April 2023, which will be presented and discussed on 
Saba. The final programme is expected to be presented in June 2023. 
• Subsequently, OLS will draw up a spatial development plan, specifically for Saba. 
Different OLS • Start with the bypass • The bypass road has currently been made into a working road for the school project.  
infrastructural road in St. Johns, road Ongoing progress  
projects maintenance, start with • Work on the grey jetter was pushed back to 2023, as it worked better with the events 
airport projects.  and other works planned for the harbor.  
• The connection of the generator room to the terminal building was being executed 
during the second half of 2022.  
• The update of the airport Master Plan was completed and now an action plan and the 
next steps have to be worked on.  
• Works on the Roads continue with the main project in the second half of 2022 being 
the widening of the road in Giles Quarter. 
 
 
Theme 3: Climate and Nature 
7
