6. Accelerated transition towards renewable energy for cost reduction 
Action Saba Responsibility Planned realization 2022 Progress and comments 
Package 2.0 
Increasing the EZK, OLS • Further concertize a plan 
• The Island Government has decided to expand renewable energy production by 
share of renewable to expand the capacity of 
constructing another solar park with battery storage (phase 1) and two small wind 
energy  renewable energy supply 
turbines (phase 2). The next step is tendering for phase 1. The Ministry of Economic 
 
Affairs and Climate Policy provides 60% of the expected costs as subsidy, another 20% is 
covered by a European subsidy. 
• This is completed. PM  
Reduced electricity SZW, OLS • OLS receives a grant from • SZW has granted $350.212 USD to the OLS for a low-income household electricity rate 
rate the national government reduction in 2022. A second grant has been transferred to the OLS in early January 2023. 
and makes sure that low- The national government has made a similar budget available to continue the reduction 
income households get this for low-income households in 2023. 
reduction • This is completed. (PM OLS execution) 
 
7. Development of nature and environment, local food production and waste management 
Action Saba Package Responsibility Planned realization 2022 Progress and comments 
2.0 
OLS, LNV, 
Implementation of • There is a Saba Nature  
the Nature and IenW, BZK/VRO and Environment Plan of • SNEPA 
Environment Policy Action.  
plan  phase 1 (2022- • The steering group The Saba Nature and Environment Plan of Action (SNEPA) is in draft, needs finalizing and final 
2025) decides on various approval from the NEPP Steering Group. This is to be worked on. The projects that are part of 
proposals and allocates a the SNEPA are already known. Some have already been approved by the steering group. 
budget from the 30 Others are in development and need finalizing. These I explain further below. 
million that will be added  
to the free allowance Funding 
• Start with executing In November 2022, the OLS received USD 3,073,900 to executive the first projects in the 
several of the approved SNEPA as part of the NEPP, capacity for a program manager, a waste water investigation and 
projects. the bounty period of the goat control project as a precondition to the execution of the other 
• There is a solution for projects. 
existing high costs of  
waste management due Capacity to execute NEPP 
to recycling. In the third quarter of 2022, a program manager was hired for the NEPP. Still the team 
working on the NEPP project is small. The OLS will request for support for more project 
management capacity to execute the projects of the SNEPA and for the control of invasive 
species (goats, rats, green iguanas). 
 
Goat control project 
In January of 2022, the OLS started a bounty period as part of its goat control project. Here 
local goat owners are incentivized to take part in the removal of their goats. A year later, 
approximately 2,000 goats have been removed. Phase 2 of the bounty period will be executed
