over the next few months to intensify the removal of goats. An operational plan will be 
developed for the removal of the remaining 10 – 20% of goats to complete the project. This 
will take place after the March 15 Island Council elections. 
 
Hydroponics farm project 
The way forward with the hydroponics farm project is being fine-tuned to realize crop 
production in 2023. This is still being done within the scope of the plan on which the subsidy 
is based. 
 
Reforestation project 
The removal of 80 – 90% of the island’s roaming goat population is a precondition to the start 
of the reforestation project. This is being worked on. The OLS is searching for expertise to 
start up the project and is in touch with STENAPA in St. Eustatius, who already has a 
reforestation team. The OLS has also reached out to RVO to assist with finding expertise for 
more continuous assistance with the project. A component of this project is to plant fruit 
trees as a step toward increasing local food production. This will be carried out on the short 
term. 
 
Waste water vision/strategy 
The Ministry of I&W is working on a monitoring program to monitor the quality of the sea 
water at Saba’s coast for a waste water vision. The OLS will liaise with I&W to find the 
required expertise. I&W will visit Saba in March. 
 
Animal husbandry and fisheries pilot project 
A pilot project will be carried out for 6 months to assist livestock owners with the high costs 
of animal food and commercial fishermen with fishing materials. Here livestock owners and 
fishermen can request for reimbursement for shipping and ABB costs on imported products. A 
longer term for 3 years has been developed and will be submitted to the steering group for 
the NEPP for approval and then sent to the Ministry of LNV to request for financial support to 
execute it. Funding for this may come from the Fund for Agriculture and Fisher BES, which 
still falls within the NEPP budget. 
 
 Backyard farming pilot project 
A pilot project has been developed and will be carried out to support backyard farming. A 
online survey will be carried out to determine the needs of these farmers. Based on the 
results, solutions will be made available for a period of 6 months. For a longer term project, 
support can be provided in a broader sense and connected to the OLS horticulture master 
plan. 
 
Education and awareness plan 
The OLS is currently in talks with the Sea & Learn foundation to develop a tailor-made plan 
focused on education and awareness on nature conservation for the NEPP. This plan will be 
presented to the NEPP steering group for review and approval.
