Strengthening of nature parks 
In order to get a better insight into the different tasks of the nature parks and their available 
funding and capacity, LNV is considering an independent assessment of the SCF and 
STENAPA. This will help the OLS assess whether the SCF is the right party to take on the 
management of Mt. Scenery National Park and the coordination over the execution over the 
coral restoration plan. The idea was developed during meetings between PES and LNV. PES is 
currently working on a draft ToR for such an assessment, after which LNV will develop it 
further. 
 
During the second half of 2022 a taskforce with representatives from Saba, Statia and IenW 
was formed with the aim of finding sustainable solutions for waste management, in 
collaboration with the both islands. In October, both islands submitted drafts plans and it was 
agreed that a phased approach would be best until a more definite plan and solutions were in 
place. A solution is sought to bridge the gap years until the islands have capabilities and 
procedures in place to implement a regional solution. Discussions/planning will continue in 
first half of 2022. 
 
 
Theme 4: Good governance 
8. Improving public service 
Action Saba Responsibility Planned realization 2022 Progress and comments 
Package 2.0 
Digitalization OLS • This is not done and needs to be rolled over for 2023. 
• A plan of action has been 
drafted.  
Improve public OLS en SZW • Explore possibilities for • Whilst in practice there is already a lot of cooperation between the Public Entity’s 
service strengthening their Community Development Department and the RCN-unit SZW, steps still need to be taken 
collaboration with the to implement this action.  Implementing this action will be taken up in the course of 2023. 
aim of providing better, • SZW has initiated a customer experience survey. The report of 29 september 2022 
and - if possible – provide tools to ameliorate public services from the perspective of the RCN-unit SZW. 
integrated services to 
the inhabitants of Saba. 
 
9. Improving public safety, legitimacy and reliability of the public administration 
Action Saba Package Responsibility Planned realization 2022 Progress and comments 
2.0 
Improving public JenV • OLS continues with the Still in progress. (PM). 
order, enforcement legal desk 
and supervision 
10
