Improving public BZK, OLS en • No specific action for • Public safety updates on progress: 
order, enforcement JenV 2022  
and supervision In order to enforce public order and enforcement we have chosen two points of focus: invest 
in prevention and teach Sabans that actions have consequences: 
  
A team of 6 enforcers was established: two main enforcers and four part-time on harbor 
safety, environmental crimes, hygiene and building safety. 
  
Regarding prevention, Saba enforcers and Public Safety have held multi-disciplinary 
inspections of bars and restaurants and vendor stalls regarding fire safety, violations of the 
General Local Ordinance and Single Use Plastic Ban and hygiene. These inspections have led 
to 5 official warnings. Input has also been given for operational permits, firework permits and 
event permits. We have also warned owners of buildings at risk of (partly) blowing away 
during a hurricane. One structure was removed on public safety grounds and two building 
owners were given warnings regarding their building. 
  
Public Safety has also worked on the implementation of the new Traffic Ordinance, which was 
passed in May 2022. This traffic ordinance covers topics including tint, alcohol controls, 
helmets, child seats and handheld devices. 
  
On top of that, public safety has given advice in a number of policy domains including: food 
safety, immigration and border security, school bus safety, inhabitants causing nuisance and 
fire safety. 
  
On the topic of consequences, we have started at the main annoyance of the Saban people: 
parking troubles. Being blocked in, not finding a space to park, these are daily irritants on an 
island where space is scarce. We started slowly with verbal warnings. In the end 111 written 
warnings were issues (berisping) and 10 fines (process verbalen) were handed out. On top of 
that, 45 car wrecks were removed from the public road by their owners after formal enforcer 
warnings. One warning was handed out in the harbor regarding an oil spill.  
 
 
10. A modern, solid and employee empowering organization with robust public finances 
Action Saba Responsibility Planned realization 2022 Progress and comments 
Package 2.0 
Finances: BZK, OLS • All mentioned topics will be • (1) Completed. 
 started in 2022. Saba's  
Priorities governing begrotingstekort en beperkte • (2) In the process.  
agreement islands financiële reserves.  
tasks 1. Saba’s financial deficit and • (3) ongoing process. 
   
weak financial reserve 
Free allowance • (4) ongoing process 
position. 
  
2. A fund for low-income 
11
