Island backlogs households that can’t • (5) new benches were bought and the sign for the airport was enhanced. The rest is 
 afford to upkeep their still ongoing.  
Motion van den homes; hurricane- 
Berg/Kuiken readiness (public • (6) This is part of the shared agenda BZK/VRO and OLS. This is not done as yet. A 
  assistance). fund to assist persons to build a home has not been realized yet, but this goal has 
3. Renovation, expansion of been added to the ‘Policy agenda housing and spatial development for the 
different government Caribbean Netherlands’. OLS will give priority to this goal in the elaboration of the 
buildings (outside, inside, island-specific action plan for Saba. 
landscaping) for instance  
Community • (7) Completed. Pending update from OLS finance.  
Development/Public Health   
4. Maintenance of buildings  • (8) Pending update.  
5. Beautification projects  
throughout the island  • (9) Completed. Pending update from OLS finance 
6. A fund to assist persons to  
build a home  • (10) The culture Covenant was signed. Culture stakeholders have been receiving 
7. Increase some assistance. We are now awaiting the final decision on letter to hire a culture coach 
departmental budgets through the ministry of OCW.  
wherever necessary, for  
instance tourism and legal  
& safety. 
8. Various assistance 
programs for the 
community 
9. Room for the island council 
to present new policies, 
projects and other 
initiatives 
10. Giving culture initiatives a 
boost 
 OLS • Start strengthening various • Someone was hired in nature and environment.  
Capacity building sections of OLS. • A head of the project bureau was hired, policy, communication and project workers 
 now fall within this department.  
• Start with organizing extra • Someone extra for HRM was hired.  
support (capacity and work • The Island council hired someone to train them and make a more robust IC. 
budget) for the island 
council. 
 OLS • Start with TOP Saba. • We have organized a PEP program for 16 persons within OLS alongside offering 
Training and • Implement education programs workshops for all civil servants.  
education at various levels for different • We meet every 6 weeks for 3- 4 days. During this time new skills are learnt as well 
groups, also for island council as tools are given to use in your everyday job.  
members.  
• Top highlighted trainings: Policy Writing, Project Management and public speaking
