-    
Executive Summary 
This document is the final report on the evaluation of the cooperation programmes implemented by the Stichting 
Ontwikkeling Nederlandse Antillen (hereinafter: SONA) during the period from 2008 to 2014 in Sint Maarten. 
PwC performed this evaluation in the period March - October 2015. In addition, PwC also performed an 
evaluation into the cooperation programmes for Curaçao and the public entities of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and 
Saba. This evaluation was commissioned by the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations (hereinafter: 
BZK). 
Main message 
Within the period 2008 – 2014, Sint Maarten used SONA funds to implement 66 projects. Activities performed 
during these projects had a positive impact on the development of Sint Maarten. SONA funding gave the 
government of Sint Maarten the opportunity to work on the construction of its country. The objectives set for the 
three cooperation programmes in 2008 proved to be ambitious. During the same period, Sint Maarten had to 
deal with the transition to an autonomous country within the Kingdom of the Netherlands; a transition which 
took much time and effort. The cooperation programmes created a better framework for further developing Sint 
Maarten and helped Sint Maarten to maintain its current course. It is up to the government of Sint Maarten and 
all its inhabitants to maintain this course in the future. 
Background of SONA 
By establishing SONA in 2004, the Netherlands and the former Netherlands Antilles (later the countries of 
Curaçao and Sint Maarten and the public entities Saba, Sint Eustatius and Bonaire) distanced the management 
of cooperation funds, and the selection and monitoring of projects, from their own governments. By doing so, 
they complied with the main recommendations of the Werkgroep-Wijers in 2002: this distance could further 
improve the effectiveness of cooperation, and bureaucracy and direct political interference could be minimised. 
The Netherlands funded the cooperation programmes based on a management agreement with SONA, whereby 
the former Netherlands Antilles (later the countries Curaçao and Sint Maarten and the public bodies Saba, Sint 
Eustatius and Bonaire) could submit project proposals which would be assessed and awarded (or not) by the 
Executive organisation SONA (hereinafter: USONA). The Netherlands made the last payment to SONA at the 
end of 2012 In total, the Netherlands paid ANG 101.8 million (approximately €51 million) to SONA, which 
benefited Sint Maarten. The cooperation programmes were brought to an end in 2014. 
Three cooperation programmes 
The cooperation funds are divided into three programmes: Institutional Strengthening and Reinforcement 
(hereinafter: IVB), Education and Youth Cooperation (hereinafter: OJSP) and Social Economic Initiative 
(hereinafter: SEI). The main objectives of these programmes were (in short): 
Programme Main objectives 
IVB  Focus on the political transition from Sint Maarten to a country within the Kingdom and ensure 
sustainable and sound public administration. 
OJSP 1. Equal development opportunities for all children over three years, regardless of their background. 
2. Broad development of intellectual, social, emotional, developmental, artistic and spiritual needs 
so children will be able to fully participate in society. 
3. Minimum level of knowledge and skills so all children can transfer opportunities for further 
education or employment to one another. 
SEI 1. SEI adopts a structural approach to the current socio-economic problems and is ultimately aimed 
at sustainably improving the socio-economic prospects of the population. 
2. Furthermore, SEI is aimed at healthy public finances, reformation of economic structures, 
availability of investment incentives and creation of a social safety net. 
 
This evaluation has two objectives: 
 Firstly, it aims to offer the Dutch parliament a global overview about how funding via SONA has 
contributed to pre-defined programme objectives for the cooperation programmes. 
  
PwC Pagina 9 van 98
