-    
 Secondly, the evaluation aims to make recommendations to Sint Maarten about how improvements 
initiated by the cooperation programmes should be preserved and sustained. 
Results 
The research questions in this evaluation involve four themes: effectiveness, sustainability, efficiency and impact 
of the three cooperation programmes. The research method for the evaluation has been described in paragraph 
1.4 of this report and fully elaborated in Annex C. At the beginning of chapters 3 (effectiveness), 4 (sustainability), 
5 (efficiency) and 6 (impact), a brief explanation has been provided about how we have answered each research 
question. 
Conclusions  
Based on activities carried out in all 66 projects, an in-depth examination of eight projects and the available 
interim and final reports for each programme, we can conclude the following concerning the effectiveness of the 
cooperation programmes: 
1. The primary objectives of the cooperation programmes were aimed at realising social impact which was 
described in ambitious and abstract terms. For example, the aim of IVB was to “establish sustainable and 
effective public administration”. Together with the lack of a baseline measurement, this made it difficult to 
measure the effect of the cooperation programmes. Given the position of St. Maarten, the available 
programme budget and the initially expected duration of four years, the goals were too ambitious. An 
example of this is the SEI programme objective of “reforming the economic structure”. At the same time, 
such lofty ambitions are understandable given the challenges Sint Maarten was facing in 2008. It is worth 
mentioning that the cooperation programmes - and the political agreements between the Netherlands and 
Sint Maarten - were not tested for feasibility before they were agreed and carried out by Sint Maarten. 
Beforehand it was unclear whether implementing all projects within a cooperation programme would lead 
to programme objectives being realised. 
2. Project proposals reflect the project’s contribution to the social effects identified in the cooperation 
programme. The assessment by USONA involved assessing the feasibility of project proposals. The 
relationship between project objectives, results and activities in project proposals was then – partly via the 
intervention of USONA – strengthened and activities performed within the project were further specified. 
The intervention logic was confirmed in financing agreements between SONA and the government of Sint 
Maarten. This helped to increase the project’s potential impact on society, while also focusing attention on 
realising activities defined in the financing agreement. 
3. The final reports show that more than half of the planned activities were realised in 94% of the projects. 
More than 80% of planned activities were realised in approximately 85% of the projects. In this sense, the 
projects also made a positive contribution to the programme objectives. The table below shows the extent 
to which activities in projects were realised for each of the cooperation programmes: 
Realization of activities within a project IVB OJSP SEI 
> 50% 91% 100% 93% 
> 80% 83% 92,3% 80% 
 
4. Final reports of the projects showed that most projects made a positive contribution to the objectives of 
programmes: 
a. The IVB projects have had a positive impact on establishment and reinforcement of the ministries; 
strengthening of High Councils of State; development of legislation and policy; development of 
information management within the government; improvement in the capacity of the tax authority 
and professional development at the Ministry of Finance. However, financial management in other 
parts of the government still needs to be improved. 
b. The educational projects have realised their activities, except for apprenticeships where a relatively 
low return was witnessed. . Pre-requisites for the improvement of education have been realised, 
such as curriculum development, improved housing, construction of a support structure, digital 
  
PwC Pagina 10 van 98
