-    
student monitoring systems, competence development of teachers and school leaders and the 
purchase of teaching materials. 
c. Within the SEI, infrastructure projects have improved traffic flow and improved rainwater and 
waste water drainage. Various measures have helped to realise the prerequisites for economic 
diversification, including the development of an economic model, competition policy, policy for 
clustering financial services and training and coaching of businesses in the SME sector. 
We should mention that, based on the realisation percentages of project activities, conclusions cannot be 
drawn about the extent to which programme objectives were realised. 
5. Considering interim and final reports, the following can be concluded for the various cooperation 
programmes: 
a. IVB succeeded in performing virtually all projects: 97% of the total budget was invested in projects. 
This can partly be attributed to the Action Plan IVB that the government of St. Maarten has drafted 
in response to recommendations in the interim evaluation in 2011. One of the recommendations in 
the interim evaluation in 2011 was: “Identify crucial IVB projects, select a manager capable of 
implementing them and let the Council of Ministers monitor their progress.” Sint Maarten has 
followed this recommendation and identified priorities and concrete results in the Action Plan 
IVB. In addition, we support the statement of the Sint Maarten government, which claims that 
projects in the IVB have had a positive impact on programme objectives. But an analysis has not 
been carried out into whether programme objectives have been fully met and whether there is 
synergy between the projects. The projects have helped to build legislative capacity, establish and 
strengthen the civil service, set up the High Councils of State and improve the supply of 
government services. Financial management and tax administration have also been improved, but 
some steps still need to be taken in both areas. 
b. We can conclude that indicators in monitoring scans performed for the OJSP show positive and 
negative trends in OJSP sub-programmes. For example, the FO programme, which showed an 
increase in student delays in the last scan: at 4.3 months and 6.1 months respectively, results in the 
two years are well above the target delay of 1.7 months. The indicator for unemployment is a 
positive example; if both “study” and “work” are considered positive social pursuits, the combined 
share of these two activities is 70%, whereas the actual target was at least 50%. However, 
performance for education lagged (far) behind the programme’s level of ambition. Implementing 
the projects may have significantly improved the education system in St. Maarten, but the project’s 
level of ambition was too high for the selected interventions. 
c. An interim evaluation has not been conducted for the SEI programme in St. Maarten. Nor has a 
final report for the SEI been delivered by the programme office. As a result, we cannot draw any 
conclusions about the extent to which the goals of the SEI programme have been realised. 
6. External sources, concerning macro developments in the themes of the cooperation programmes, show 
the following picture: 
 In terms of IVB programme objectives “strengthen civil service and governance” and “sound 
financial position”, the Court of Auditors in St. Maarten and the Financial Supervisory Council have 
issued critical reports about the integrity of the civil service and administration - i.e. delays in 
drafting and determining budgets; amendment of budgets and annual accounts by the Sint Maarten 
government; and poor performance by the tax authority. These reports do not support the 
impression that the two programme objectives in the IVB have been realised. No relevant external 
reports could be found for the two other two programme objectives. 
 In terms of OJSP sub-programmes “compulsory education: education for all” and “Social Training”, 
figures concerning the increase in pupil numbers tend to suggest that the programme objective has 
been realised, when compared to the increase in the population aged four to fifteen years. We have 
not found any relevant external sources or figures for the other three sub-programmes of the OJSP. 
  
PwC Pagina 11 van 98
