-    
 In terms of the eight themed areas of the SEI, we were able to access relevant external sources in six 
of the areas. This means economic data has not improved, nor has it deteriorated. Given the 
stagnating world economy during this cooperation programme, we see this as a positive sign about 
the objectives of the SEI being realised, because Sint Maarten is a small open economy. 
Based on an in-depth analysis of the eight selected projects, we can conclude the following about the sustainability 
of the cooperation programmes: 
1. We see that no feasibility studies were carried out to assess the financial sustainability of any of the three 
cooperation programmes prior to their start. This meant a certain risk was accepted at the political level. 
We believe that the financial sustainability of programmes, i.e. structurally embedding the maintenance 
and management of all project results into the budget of Sint Maarten, could have been focussed on in 
advance. This becomes clear when the total budget of the three cooperation programmes is compared to 
the annual budget of Sint Maarten: ANG 101.8 million compared to the annual budget of ANG 432 
million (2012), or 23.5%. 
2. The eight projects in our in-depth study show a mixed picture for financial sustainability: 
a. The IVB offers a mixed outlook. Improvements in tax administration have started to bear fruit. We 
understand that the government is financing a follow-up project, New Tax Phase 2, to increase its 
recovery and charge capacity. The ministries work with budgets that allow core tasks to be 
continued, which allows registers and information systems to remain operational and 
competencies to be further developed. 
b. The two educational projects in the in-depth study, and the final reports of OJSP projects, show 
that school boards are able to secure financial sustainability for the results achieved under the 
OJSP via a lump sum subsidy, which excludes major maintenance in schools. 
c. The financial sustainability of infrastructure projects in the SEI appears to have been reasonably 
secured via the road management plan and the annual budget for maintenance. The government 
has made a substantial contribution to most of the policy areas in the SEI. For example, the in-
depth investigation revealed that the funding needs of the tourist office are twice as high as the 
annual grant. 
3. There is a mixed outlook concerning institutional sustainability, and the incorporation of knowledge and 
experience into policy: 
a. Sint Maarten has followed the recommendation to enhance institutional sustainability, as 
mentioned in the interim IVB evaluation in 2011. Institutional and policy-related sustainability for 
IVB has also been safeguarded for the most part. The new administrative organization has been 
legally and politically anchored; HR policy has been formulated and seems to have been 
introduced in practice; digital information, accounting systems and training seems to be in 
progress. 
b. Institutional and policy-related sustainability for OJSP has been largely safeguarded by legally 
supporting policy for FO, VSBO and SBO. Various policy areas, such as language policy and 
student care, are the legal responsibility of school boards and, as far as we can tell, have been 
embedded into the school boards’ policy. The OJSP programme Monitor recommends developing 
an action plan aimed at realising the objectives. Such a plan could contribute to the sustainability 
of the OJSP. This plan has not yet been drawn up by the government of Sint Maarten. 
c. Due to political changes in Sint Maarten, it was a challenge to embed (the results of) projects into 
government policy. For example, the SEI project “Zoning Sint Maarten” has been hindered by 
political changes / confusion. At administrative level, the project is well safeguarded in the 
organization (Vromi), but the plan still has not been implemented because all plans are still in the 
adoption process. When projects show direct, tangible results, it appears to be easy to maintain or 
further develop policy or institutions. A good example is the IVB project “Public Service Centre”. 
  
PwC Pagina 12 van 98
