-    
This project is clearly having a positive effect on the population of Sint Maarten and, as a result, 
various ministries have offered more support to the project, thus improving the project’s success. 
4. Finally, when working with people from the government itself, we noticed a “learning curve” in terms of 
project management experience. This was an important side effect of the cooperation programmes and 
contributed to institutional sustainability. This was not so much the case when working with 
temporary/insourced employees In four of the eight projects we studied in-depth, we were not convinced 
that institutional and policy-related sustainability has been safeguarded. 
Based on an in-depth analysis of eight selected projects in Sint Maarten, we can conclude the following about the 
efficiency of the cooperation programmes: 
1. In terms of deliverables within projects, people and resources were generally deployed efficiently. This 
applies to projects in all three of the cooperation programmes. There were mixed fortunes concerning the 
efficiency of the more ambitious project objectives (social effect). Most of the projects have been quite 
effective considering the available budget (IVB project “Public Service Centre”, OJSP project “Cycle 2 
FO”, SEI projects concerning traffic flow), while other projects have not (yet) been very effective at all 
(IVB project “New Tax Authority Sint Maarten”, SEI project “Zoning SXM”). All things considered, these 
projects have (thus far) had little impact on society and cannot be regarded as efficient. 
2. The fact that most of the eight projects studied in-depth have helped to achieve programme objectives, 
can partly be attributed to the role played by USONA in supervising the design and implementation of 
projects. 
3. The underlying principle of the cooperation programmes is that the government of Sint Maarten bears 
responsibility for submitted projects, from writing the proposal to the evaluation. The Sint Maarten 
government was responsible for ensuring that all proposed projects would help to realise the objectives of 
the cooperation programmes. Reprioritisation took place while the cooperation programmes were being 
implemented. This reprioritisation was aimed at increasing the sustainability, efficiency and effectiveness 
of the programmes and was partly based on the results of interim evaluations. The aim was to improve 
compatibility between projects and policy areas, and to thus achieve higher efficiency in the cooperation 
programmes.. 
4. There was a mixed picture concerning the efficiency with which cooperation programmes were 
implemented. The stakeholders – the governments of the Netherlands and Sint Maarten, SONA and its 
executive organisation USONA – have actively promoted efficient use of funds from cooperation 
programmes by reprioritising and granting extensions. Besides this, none of the stakeholders involved in 
regularly shaping and assessing project proposals visibly intervened in order to safeguard the efficiency 
of cooperation programmes: project proposals were assessed individually, and not comparatively, and 
normally in the order they were received. This method complies with procedural arrangements for the 
cooperation programmes between the Netherlands, Sint Maarten, SONA and USONA. Nevertheless, this 
has limited the efficiency of the cooperation programmes as a whole. 
Based on a general assessment of effectiveness, an in-depth examination of eight selected projects in Sint Maarten 
and the reports for each programme, we can conclude the following about the impact of the cooperation 
programmes: 
1. Considering the position of Sint Maarten in 2008 in all thematic areas of cooperation programmes, we 
can conclude that the cooperation programmes have had a positive impact on Sint Maarten’s society. At 
the same time, we can conclude that the objectives of the cooperation programmes have not been realised 
to some extent. The following factors explain this: 
a. In Sint Maarten, many projects were carried out in cooperation programmes at a time when the 
government of Sint Maarten was facing a major transition. Many parts of public administration in 
Sint Maarten had to be built from scratch when programmes were being implemented. 
Beforehand, one could have expected this to jeopardise the impact (and effectiveness and 
sustainability) of the cooperation programmes. 
  
PwC Pagina 13 van 98
