-    
b. As far as the cooperation programmes are concerned, the available budget is high in relation to the 
budget of Sint Maarten (23.5% of annual national budget). This relatively high budget was spread 
across many projects, making project management a great burden on the government apparatus. 
c. The measures to be taken in the programmes were identified, but an assessment was not carried 
out in advance to see whether these measures would have the biggest possible impact on 
programme objectives. It is impossible to tell whether the investments would have had more 
impact if a feasibility study had been carried out for the programmes. Program feasibility was also 
not addressed when monitoring the programmes. 
2. We see the previously identified learning curve in project management and the role of policy as a positive 
impact of the cooperation programmes. 
Recommendations to Sint Maarten  
1. We recommend the government of Sint Maarten to safeguard the impact of projects financed from SONA 
resources, by determining whether or not each project has been embedded in government policy and, if 
so, whether other financial or institutional resources can be tapped than those of the government itself. 
Any cooperation with third parties requires clear understanding of everyone's interests and clear 
collaboration agreements.  
We also advise the government of Sint Maarten to determine exactly which activities and replacement 
investments are needed over time in order to maintain the impact of the projects. On this basis, clear 
choices have to be made about which project results have priority, so appropriate attention and budget 
can be assigned to the most important achievements..  
Finally, we recommend identify officials from the Sint Maarten government who have gained a lot of 
experience with projects in cooperation programmes. The knowledge and experience of these 
government employees makes them valuable human resources for the government. We thus recommend 
assigning these personnel to important new projects and programmes, so their past experiences can be 
used effectively.  
2. Sint Maarten has now been an autonomous country for five years and remains a country in development. 
We recommend the government of Sint Maarten to formulate specific objectives when new projects are 
started, which are financed from its own budget, measurable and realistic (in consultation with project 
stakeholders). We also recommend performing a baseline assessment on indicators used to measure its 
objectives, so the starting position will be clear. This will allow the government to clearly determine 
whether results are actually are achieved., and to better determine which circumstances contributed to 
good or bad project results.  
We also recommend the government of Sint Maarten to select specific components which will require 
government attention (in terms of money and manpower) in the future. By exercising more central 
influence on government projects that will be implemented in the future, it will be possible to increase 
the focus, effectiveness, sustainability and impact of government projects  
3. Good results were realised in projects involving the realisation of physical infrastructure or the purchase 
and commissioning of production facilities. It was more difficult to realise objectives that focussed on 
interventions in human (cultural, organizational) behaviour.  
4. We recommend the government of Sint Maarten to precisely determine the goals and expected results of 
projects, and to shape activities in projects so realised objectives and results can be monitored during 
project implementation. Because projects aimed at changing human behaviour can be complex, it is 
essential to engage the right knowledge (i.e. psychologists, behavioural scientists, experts or 
organisational change experts) in order to guarantee success.  
  
  
PwC Pagina 14 van 98
