-    
Analyse Sint Maartense economie 
Het International Monetary Fund (IMF) houdt jaarlijkse bilaterale gesprekken met haar leden. In de gesprekken 
met Curaçao en Sint Maarten die gehouden zijn in 2014, geeft het IMF de volgende analyse die betrekking heeft 
13
op de (Curaçaose en) Sint Maartense economie: 
‘After some initial slippages, both countries have brought their fiscal policies in compliance with the 
fiscal rules that had been agreed with the Netherlands in 2010 in exchange for significant debt relief. 
(…) Sint Maarten has been recovering, growing by about 1 percent on average over 2012-13, thanks to 
the ongoing recovery in the United States (the source of 60 percent of its tourists) and the construction 
of the Simpson Bay causeway. The improving global outlook and the recovery in tourism are expected 
to support economic activity in the near term, especially in Sint Maarten. 
Executive Board Assessment 
The authorities of both countries have made important efforts to strengthen their underlying fiscal 
position. Looking forward, they should continue to gear fiscal policy toward supporting ongoing 
external adjustment and building buffers. (…) For Sint Maarten, strengthening the tax administration 
to tackle declining tax compliance and fund its newly acquired functions is critical. The latter could also 
be bolstered by increased contributions to the budget by public companies. The next government after 
the coming elections should build on the current administration’s efforts to keep public wage 
developments in check, including by reviewing the existing indexation mechanisms. 
Significantly greater effort is needed in tackling structural impediments to growth and job creation. A 
dynamic private sector, which is the linchpin of sustained growth in the medium term, requires tackling 
the maze of permits and licenses, which has hampered investment and innovation. Rigid labor laws 
and the system of welfare payments for unemployed should be reviewed, to shift emphasis from 
protecting jobs to protecting workers, facilitate needed cyclical adjustments in the workforce, and 
ensure adequate incentives and support for job search by the unemployed. Restrictions to hiring foreign 
workers should be removed, while at the same time ensuring that all workers (local and domestic) are 
afforded adequate labor conditions. (…) Finally, both governments should improve the statistical 
infrastructure and data — which are presently not adequate for effective macroeconomic analysis, 
surveillance, and policy response — through greater investment and, where appropriate, technical 
assistance.’ 
Het Rabobank Country Report 2013 over Sint Maarten geeft kernachtig de volgende analyse van de Sint 
14
Maartens economie: 
‘Sterke punten 
 Hoog inkomensniveau. Vergeleken met andere landen in de regio, kent Sint Maarten een relatief hoge 
levensstandaard met een inkomen per hoofd van de bevolking van USD 22.179 in 2011. Dit geeft het land 
enige mogelijkheid om zich aan te passen in economisch moeilijke tijden. 
Zwakke punten 
 Vertraging in het opzetten van een institutioneel raamwerk. In oktober 2010 werd Sint Maarten een 
autonoom land binnen het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden. Sinds die tijd heeft Sint Maarten haar 
institutionele raamwerk uitgebreid, hoewel het proces langzamer vooruitgaat dan verwacht.  
 Smalle economische basis. Ongeveer 80% van de Sint Maartense economie bestaat uit toerisme, waarbij 
een substantieel deel van de toeristen uit de VS komt. 
 Zwakke externe positie. Een groot tekort op de lopende rekening en een laag niveau van de 
deviezenreserves binnen de monetaire unie, stelt Sint Maartense economie bloot aan externe 
                                                             
13
 IMF Press Release No. 14/384 on Country Report No. 14/239, Curaçao and Sint Maarten, August 27, 2014. 
14
 Rabobank Country Report Sint Maarten, 4 september 2013. Vertaling PwC. 
  
PwC Pagina 23 van 98
