FINANCIËLE EVALUATIE COLLEGE VOOR DE RECHTEN VAN DE MENS 
English summary 
Introduction 
In 2012 the Dutch national human rights institute (NHRI) was instituted under the name of 
College voor de rechten van de mens (hereafter to be referred to as the College or CRM). 
The College is an NHRI as specified in the “Paris Principles”, endorsed in 1993 by VN resolu-
tion 48/13. The International Coordinating Committee for National Human Rights Institu-
tions (ICC) is the international association of NHRIs from all parts of the globe. Established in 
1993, the ICC promotes and strengthens NHRIs to be in accordance with the Paris Principles, 
and provides leadership in the promotion and protection of human rights. The ICC under-
takes accreditation of NHRIs in accordance with the Paris Principles; accreditation can result 
in either an A, B or C status. The A status, granted when an institute entirely complies with 
the Paris Principles, entitles to participation and the right to speak in various UN bodies and 
panels. Of the more than hundred operational NHRI’s worldwide, more than sixty have been 
conferred the A-status.  
 
The Paris Principles contain the conditions the NHRI has to comply with in order to be eligi-
ble for ICC accreditation. In order to acquire the A status, a national institution shall be 
granted the competence to promote and protect human rights and be given as broad a 
mandate as possible, specified by law. Furthermore, the Paris Principles specify a set of 
tasks, the requirements independence and of a pluralist representation of social forces. 
Independence implies adequate funding, enabling the NHRI to have its own staff and prem-
ises and to conduct its activities smoothly. The NHRI should not be subject to forms of gov-
ernmental financial control which might affect its independence. In May 2014, the ICC con-
ferred the A status to the College.  
 
The College has the legal status of an autonomous agency under Dutch law. The body has a 
chairperson, eight members and nine substitute members. Its supporting office is headed by 
a Director who controls three departments: Front Office & Rulings, Research & Advice and 
Management. The explanatory memorandum that went with the bill that founded the Col-
lege, explicitly states that two years after the initiation of the College, an evaluation will be 
commissioned to assess whether the funding of the College is adequate for the execution of 
its statutory tasks. Depending on the outcome of the evaluation, the budget legislator may 
adjust the budgetary frame of the College. The provision stems from concerns uttered dur-
ing the conception of the bill regarding the sufficiency of the funding. The research institute 
of the ministry of Security and Justice commissioned Pro Facto to perform this financial 
evaluation. 
 
Research questions and research design 
The goal of the evaluation research is an appraisal of the accomplishments of the College set 
against the ambitions vested in the institute at its inception and given the financial means 
available. The core evaluation questions were: 
 
What was the ambition for which the College for human rights was established, how does 
the College function and how should the allocation of the budget of the College be ap-
praised? 
 
xxviii
