FINANCIËLE EVALUATIE COLLEGE VOOR DE RECHTEN VAN DE MENS 
What is the appraisal of the size of the College’s budget, set against the ambitions for the 
College, in the view of the College itself, in the view of its stakeholders and according to 
independent experts? 
 
In order to collect the data for answering these questions, documents were studied, finan-
cial data were analysed, 33 key informants inside and outside the College were interviewed 
and a survey was conducted amongst stakeholders and independent experts. 
 
Ambitions, goals, tasks 
The legislator granted the College the broad mandate and the set of tasks stipulated in the 
Paris Principles. The tasks outlined in the founding law can be clustered as follows: 
1. Adjudicative: investigating and judging on complaints concerning equal treatment; 
2. Advisory: stimulating and undertaking research, reporting and advising on issues 
over the broad range of human rights; 
3. Normative: promoting and encouraging the ratification of or accession to human 
rights treaties and other such instruments and promoting and ensuring their imple-
mentation; 
4. Informative: increasing public awareness of human rights, especially through infor-
mation and education. 
 
The first of the four tasks used to be performed by the Committee on equal treatment. After 
the commencement of the College in 2012 this task was transferred to the College. The ad-
judicative task is demand driven, meaning that the actual input in the execution of this task 
is determined by the number of complaints to be adjudicated and the requests for infor-
mation to be dealt with. 
 
The other three tasks are input driven. The College has (in accordance with the Paris Princi-
ples) total discretion within the framework of the tasks stipulated by the law, to select and 
prioritize issues and to design and execute measures and activities. During the initial stage 
of the institution, a founding task force developed a strategic plan, identifying goals and 
priorities within the broad mandate of the College. This plan specifies the issues and activi-
ties that will have priority attention of the College in the years 2013-2015. In doing so, the 
College thoughtfully and meticulously searched for a framework to optimize the implemen-
tation of its tasks, given the means available. The resulting scheme stipulates five strategic 
goals: 
1. In government policies, in laws and regulations, human rights are respected and se-
cured.  
2. Violations of human rights, either by public authorities or other parties, are being 
prohibited or corrected. 
3. All people in the Netherlands understand their human rights and those of others 
and are capable to enjoy those rights.   
4. Public authorities, parliament, organizations and individuals actively assume re-
sponsibility for respecting and securing human rights. 
5. The College for human rights matures into the authority on human rights in the 
Netherlands. 
 
Beyond that, in its strategic agenda the College prioritized six issue areas: 
1. Elderly care and human rights  
2. Migration and human rights   
3. Discrimination at the entrance to the labour market  
xxix
