FINANCIËLE EVALUATIE COLLEGE VOOR DE RECHTEN VAN DE MENS 
4. Ratification and implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities 
5. Human rights education 
6. Ratification of other treaties 
 
The strategic plan is operationalized in sets of activities that are de facto being implement-
ed. Thus all statutory tasks and ambitions of the College are transformed into actions. How-
ever, not all parts of the statutory duties receive sufficient coverage, according to the Col-
lege itself. In particular, the College is dissatisfied with the progress in the domain of 
“human rights education”. The initial course of action was aimed at making human rights a 
required subject in the curriculum of primary and secondary education. When the ministry 
of education let it be known that it saw no room for such a regulated incorporation in the 
curricula, the College felt that the only other route available was to take human rights edu-
cation in its own hands. However, the College lacks the resources to really apply itself to this 
labour-intensive task. 
 
Organisation and resources 
In 2014, the budget of the College amounted to € 5.7 million. This equals the budget previ-
ously available to the Committee on equal treatment : € 5,6 million in 2010. The initial en-
largement of this budget with € 0.9 million (of which € 0.6 permanent) at the start of the 
College was virtually wiped out by consecutive rounds of civil service wide cutbacks. To 
meet this reduction in financial resources, the College decided on a number of austerity 
measures, both in personnel and equipment. In 2015, of the personnel entitlement of 57.6 
fte, only 48,5 fte have been filled. The reduction of personnel was realized by decreases in 
the College and the senior management. In the area of adjudication efficiency was greatly 
enhanced, both in terms of personnel input and in terms of lead time. The Chairperson of 
the College has expressed her concerns about insufficient resources in a number of letters 
to the minister and in consultations with the ministry. The ministry however takes the view 
that general budget cuts regard the whole civil service and that there is no reason to make 
an exception for the College. 
 
The financial reporting of the College to the ministry is done according to the regular prac-
tices of the departmental P&C cycle. The College is subject to the common accountancy 
instruments of the civil service such as the annual audit, the planning and control cycle and 
the regulations concerning outsourcing, procurement and invoicing. However, in deference 
to the special autonomous position of the College, the annual reporting is highly aggregated 
in nature while the financial consultations with the ministry are limited to basics.  
 
Perceptions 
The stakeholders and independent experts that contributed their views for this evaluation 
generally hold a positive view of the way the College has selected its priorities and deals 
with the discharge of its statutory functions. A negative exception is human rights educa-
tion, one of the six prioritized domains: 42% of the respondents who offered an opinion on 
the subject considered the performance of the College in this area wanting. The College 
acknowledges that human rights education has not been sufficiently developed.  
 
Beyond that, a relatively large number of respondents notes that the College might give 
more attention to co-production. More cooperation with other institutions and organiza-
tions in the field of human rights for the realisation of the ambitions of the College might 
partly address the issue of limited resources and enhance the effectiveness of the College. 
The College, in response to these suggestions, asserts that there is a limit to what coopera-
xxx
