FINANCIËLE EVALUATIE COLLEGE VOOR DE RECHTEN VAN DE MENS 
tion can achieve, given the independent position of the College and the College’s holistic 
approach to human rights promotion and protection. 
 
Efficiency 
The core question of this evaluation is, whether the financial means available to the College 
are sufficient for an adequate execution of all its statutory functions. It is essentially not 
possible to provide this question with a definite answer: there are is no measuring rod avail-
able to determine whether the execution is adequate. The College’s broad mandate and 
autonomous status make the College itself the judge of what is a satisfactory performance. 
In last resort the ICC, as accrediting institution, can authoritatively assess the performance 
of the Dutch NIHR. So in the end, deciding on the annual budget of the College is a value call 
for the budgetary legislator. Still, this evaluation provides a number of insights that can 
benefit the budgetary legislator in its decision making.    
 
The legislator deliberately did not substantially increase the amount of money available for 
the institution when it transformed the Committee on equal rights into the Dutch NHRI. The 
assumption was that efficiency measures and cutbacks in the adjudication function would 
make sufficient funds available for the new human rights tasks. The College managed ac-
cordingly and took efficiency measures that released resources for the new functions. Since 
then the financial allotment from the state budget has shrunk rather than grown, due to 
several rounds of overall cutbacks in national spending. Thus the College is now operating 
on a budget far smaller than the legislator initially deemed adequate. 
 
Given the budget initially allotted, the College set out to develop a strategic plan with priori-
tized domains, issues and goals. The evaluation shows that the College proceeded purpose-
fully and well considered when deciding on the allocation of its resources on different alter-
native courses of action. So throughout its three years of existence, the College deliberately 
sought for ways to make ends meet. Still there are indications, primarily derived from the 
interviews, that the College could strengthen its capabilities for promoting human rights if it 
would more actively seek cooperation with other institutions and organisations in the field 
of human rights – both in its strategic planning and in the organization of activities on the 
ground. 
 
The College itself explicitly holds the position that the present budget, depleted by rounds 
of cutbacks, is far too limited for an adequate discharge of its statutory duties. Effectively 
increasing public awareness of human rights, especially through information and education 
and by making use of all press organs, no doubt invokes far more resources than the College 
has at its command right now. The adjudication task still sequesters a large part of the 
budget, the efficiency measures in the adjudication processes notwithstanding.  
 
The guidelines on NHRI resources and independence in the Paris Principles do not provide 
direct support for the position of the College; they are to general to derive specifics on the 
size of an NHRI budget from. It is not likely however that the present budget is endangering 
the accreditation of the College yet. 
 
The interviews and the survey among stakeholders and experts did not provide strong indi-
cations that the budget of the College has sunk below a minimum threshold. Actually most 
respondents were reluctant to express straightforward views, since they lack insight in the 
spending of the College. It will be useful if the College extended its financial reporting to the 
outside world, creating more transparency about the allocation of its resources and the 
spending on various activities.  
xxxi
