NAV 58/14
Page 12
Revocatlon of the existing deep-water route inside the of traffic
borders the separation
schemes from Gogland Island to Rodsher Island
3.58 The
Sub-Commfttee approved the revocation of the existing deep-water route inside
the borders
of the traffic separation schemes from Gogland
Island to Rodsher Island, as set
out
in annex 2, which the Committee is invited
to adopt.
Establishment of
new recommended tracks and traffic separation line betwean the
traffic separation schemes ‘0ff Rodsher Island” and Gogland Island”
“0ff
3.59 The Sub-Committee approved
the establishment of new recommendeci tracks and
traffic separation line between
the traffic separation schemes “0ff Rodsher Island” and
“0ff Gogland Islarid”,
as set out in annex 2, which the Committee is invited to adopt.
Mandatory ship reporting system
Mandatory ship reporting system in the Barents Area SRS)
(Barents
3.60 The Sub-Committee approved
the new mandatory ship reporting system “In the
Barenis Area
(Barents SRS)”, as set out in annex 3, whlch the Committee is Invited to adopt.
4 AMENOMENTS TO THE GENERAL
PROVISIONS ON SHIPS’ ROUTEING
(RESOLUTION A.572(14), AMENDED)
AS
The
4.1 Sub-Committee recalled that MSC 89 had agreed to
inciude. in the
post-biennial agenda of the Comrnittee,
an output on “Amendments to the General
Provisions on Ships’ Routeing
(resolution A.572(14), as amended)”, with a target cornpletion
year of 2013, assigning
the NAV Sub-Committee as the coordinating organ; and instructed
the NAV
Sub-Committee to inciude the output in the provisional agenda for NAV 58.
4.2 The Sub-Comrnittee considered
document NAV 58/4 (Netherlands and United
proposing
States) amendmerits to section 6 (Design Criteria), annex 1 resolution
to
A.572(14), as amended — General Provisioris on Ships’ to provide
Routeing, additional
guidance for the design and description ships’ routeing
of systems, In particular of traffic
separation schemes.
4.3 The delegation of China, whilst supporting the proposed
amendments to the
General Provisions on SIiips’ Routeing,
informed the Sub-Comrnittee that they were in the
process of revising
the existing IMO-adopted traffic separatiori scheme “In the waters off
Chengshan Jiao Promontory” and would be submitting a suitable proposal for consideration
by the Sub-Committee in due course.
4.4 The delegation the
of Russian Federation expressed the view that the proposed
amendments should
be reflected in documents MSC/Circ.1060 and MSC.1/Circ.1060/Add.1.
In this
context, the Secretariat clarified that the proposed amendments were intended
for
resolution A.572(14), as amended, because
the General Provfsions on Ships’ Roufeing are
established pursuant to regulation
Vu 0 (Ships’ Routeing) of the SOLAS Convention.
4.5 After some discussion, the Sub-Committee referred the proposal Ships’
to the
Routeing Working Group for detailed consideration and
advice.
l:\NAV’i5$14.doc
