NAV 58/14
Page
14
5.7 In light
of the foregoing, the Sub-Committee referred the Iiaison statement on the
preparation of
WRC-15 to the Technical Working Group to review initiatives on
the proposed
applications
using AlS technology, and provide
comments and advice, as appropriate.
“Man overboard” slnillar
(MOB) and devices using AIS-SART technology
5.8 The SubCommittee recalled MSC 90
that (MSC 90/28, paragraph 8.19) had
instructed the Sub-Committee
to develop draft guidance to seafarers, to be further
considered and finalized
by COMSAR 17, regarding the difficulties arising in interpreting the
AIS-SART symbol,
along with the established text message SART ACTIVE, when used for
MOB
and similar devices using AIS-SART technology.
5.9 The Sub-Committee
considered the information along with proposed draft guidance
to seafarers provided
by Australia (NAV 58/5/1) to assist the consideration concerns
in of the
raised
at COMSAR 16 regarding the difficulties arising the
in interpreting AIS-SART symbol,
along with the established text ACTIVE,
message SART when used for MOB and similar
devices using AIS-SART technology.
5.10
In this context, the Sub-Committee agreed that regarding
the issues raised the
AlS text messages should be addressed
by the Technical Working Group when considering
the liaison statement
from ITU-R WP 56 concerning the draft revision of Recommendation
ITU-R M.1371-4
(paragraphs 5.3 to 5.5 refer).
5.11 The Sub-Committee further
noted that, because some Member Governments had
licensed/accepted the
use of these types of devices; and they were obtainable over the
Internet,
other Member Governments were unable prevent their
to use. Unfortunately, this
had taken place before seeking international
harmonization on matters of concern. It would
have been beneficial if harmonization cii
an international level had been debated at a much
earlier stage in the
process.
5.12 The delegation of the United supported
Kingdom, by others, expressed the view that
AIS-SART was intended for
the location of a survival craft as part of a suite of
communications to
be deployed within the GMDSS in a search and rescue situation.
They
were of the view that there was a need to address the fundamental whether
question
AlS should be used for distress communications.
1f such devices were to be used for distress
communications, then necessary
the procedures should be followed in order to achieve an
international acceptance
of, and standards for, these devices including an understanding of
relevant
any actions that were Incumbent en manufacturers, owner/operators, response
authorities and at sea: OnIy after
addressing these issues, consideration might be given to
what might constitute an appropriate
message text.
5.13 After a brief discussion, the Sub-Committee referred
document NAV 58/5/1
(subparagraphs 17.4 and .17.5
and annex) to the Technical Working Group for the
preparation of advice on
the appropriate rnaritlme identity of diver locating devices, inciuding
SN circular
a draft providing guidance to seafarers regarding the difficulties arising in
unterpreting the AIS-SART symbol, along the established niessage
with text SART ACTIVE,
wheri used for MOB and similar
devices usung AIS-SART technology, to be further
considered and finalized COMSAR
by 17.
Report of the Technical Working Group
5.14 Having received
and considered the Technical Working Group’s report
(NAV 58/WP.5), the
Sub-Committee, in particular (with reference to paragraphs 3.1 to 3.18
and annexes 1 to 3), took action as summarized in the ensuing paragraphs.
l:\NAV’5814.doc
