NAV 58114
Page 17
.3 use of the IHO’s S-lOO standard as the baseline for creating a framework
for data access and services under the scope of SOL.AS; and
.4 proposed joint plan of work on e-navigation for the COMSAR, NAV and
STW Sub-Committees for the period 201 2-2014,
and had also agreed that, for the required until future uses
time being, no further action was
of the frequency band also
of 495-505 kHz were identified for e-navigation. MSC 90 had
authorized the
establishment of an IMD/IHO Harmonization Group on data modelling and
approved
its terrns of reference.
6.6 The Chairman
recalled that:
.1 the Secretary-General’s opening remarks had underlined the importance of
remainirig focuseci analysis cost-benefit and
on finalizing the gap and the
risk 0fl
analyses. Other parallel developments should concentrate
guidelines for usability evaluation of navigational equipment, integrated
position, navigation and timing system, software quality assurance and
guidelines for test beds but without delaying the finalization of the Strategy
Implementation Plan; and
.2 t was important to remain focused on the agreed work programme and to
not become distracted new technology.
by tangential matters such as
It was imperative that the Sub-Committee should now focus attention
primarily on finalizing the gap analysis and the cost-benefit and risk
analyses and adhere to the revised joint plan of work approved by MSC 90.
6.7 The Sub-Committee considered the report of the Correspondence Group (CG) on
e-navigation (NAV 5816) outlining the ongoing development of the detailed architecture on
e-navigation, a proposal for a completed gap analysis for finalization, a procedure for
identifying Risk Control
Options, further development of the Maritime Service Portfolios, the
development of guidelines for usability evaluation of navigational equipment, the
development of guidelines for the harrnonization of test beds, as well as a draft outline for the
final Strategy Implementation Plan.
6.8 In this context, a few delegations including an industry observer were in favour of a
rigorous assessmerit of the gap analysis with view to a firial refined list of high-level goals.
a
6.9 The Sub-Committee agreed that the report of the CG should be used as the basic
document for further work during this session and to instruct the e-navigation working group,
proposed to be established under this item, to undertake a thorough review of the report
before the Sub-Committee could relevant actions.
take the requested
6.10 The Sub-Corpmittee considered documents NAV 58/6/1, NAV 58/6/2 and
NAV 58/6/3 (Germany) relating to a resilient Integrated Position, Navigation and Timing
System as intended to support
part of the lntegrated Navigation System (INS), which was
meeting e-navigation user needs such as improvement and indication of rellability.
6.11 After a brief discussion, the Sub-Committee agreed that it was premature to
consider lntegrated Navigation Systems (INS) a core element e-navigation/carriage
as of
requirements of ECDIS to
means e-navigation.
I:NAV5814,doc
