NAV 58/14
Page 19
6.22 After discussion,
some the Sub-Committee referred document NAV 58/6/7
(Denmark
and Norway) to the Technical Working Group for consideration and advice
(paragraph 5.16 refers).
6.23 The Sub-Committee considered NAV 58/6/8 (Republic of Korea)
document outlining
a method for
feedback to enable Member States to provide the outcomes of test-bed projects
with
dear reference to the navigation development process and/or elements of Strategy
Implementation Plan.
6.24 The Sub-Committee
referred document NAV 5816/8 (Republic of Korea) to the
e-navigation
working group for consideration and advice, 1f time permitted.
6.25 The Sub-Committee noted with appreciation information document
the contained in
NAV 58/INF.3 (IMPA) providing
observations on IMO’s e-navigation strategy and stating that
three
considerations ware of paramount importance, i.e. fostering consensus among key
stakeholders and how they were applied; ensuring a pragmatic and tlexible approach that
took account of the complexity and diversity world’s transportation
of the marine system and
maintained
a realistic appreciation of the evolutionary nature of change to navigation
systems.
6.26 The Sub-Ccmmittee noted with appreciation information contained
the in document
NAV 58/INF.4
(Norway) providing details on the outcome of a workshop held to demonstrate
the use of the S-lOO framework data standard which included information on results from
other test beds as weH as consideration of potential synergies between and the
e-navigation
Marine Electronic Highway project
in the Straits of Malacca and Singapore.
The Sub-Committee agreed that the information would be beneficial to the e-navigation
working group and agreed to refer it to the working group.
6,27
The Sub-Committee noted with appreciation the information contained in document
NAV 58/INF.5 (IALA) providing information on a modular and open concept of integrated
Position, Navigation and Timing (PNT) data system, which could meet e-navigation user
needs such as Irnprovement and indication of reliability.
6,28
The Sub-Committee noted with appreciation the information contained in document
NAV 58/INF.6 (the Nautical Institute) providing information on the resuits and
recommendations of a workshop on usability evaluation of held by
navigational equipment
the Nautical lnstitute in Malmö, Sweden, during January 2012.
6.29 The Sub-Committee noted with appreciation the information contained in document
NAV 58/INF.1O (Australia) providing details on the review of Human
and the application the
Element (HEAP)
Analysing Process to the e-navigation gap analysis.
6.30 The Sub-Committee noted with appreciation the information contained document
in
NAV 58/INF.1 1 (Australia) providing details on the human element principles support
that the
application
of HEAP within the e-navigation gap analysis. Analysis based on data from
real-time observation of normal operatioris, along with risk mitigation strategies based on
human error management theory, were considered relevant to the Organization’s strategic
plan for addressing human element and
the the ISM Code.
6.31 In this context, the Sub-Cornmittee referred:
.1 document NAV 58/INF.l0 to the e-navigation working group,
for
consideration advice; and
and
.2 NAV 58/INF.11 to the STW Sub-Committee for its consideration.
I:\NAV58\14doc
