NAV 58/14
Page 21
process and/or elements of the Strategy
e-rlavigation development
recommendations,
Implementation Plan and provide comments and
as appropriate.
Report of the e-navigation working group
6.36 Having and considered the e-navigation working group’s report
received
(NAV 58/WP.6), reference to paragraphs 5.5.1 to 5.1.8 and
the Sub-Committee (with
ensuing paragraphs.
annexes 1 to 4) took action as summarized in the
of the
6.37 The Sub-Committee rioted the progress made with regard to the development
detailed onboard e-navigation architecture and invited IALA, IHO and other relevant
organizations to contribute to its further developmerit.
this context, the delegation of Cyprus expressed the view that all international
6,38 In
organizations competence of the Organization and adhere to the
should respect the
decisions taken by its relevant bodies thereon.
6.39 The Sub-Committee also noted that the gap analysis had been completed and:
annex 7;
.1 approved the final list of gaps of e-navigation, as set out in
endorsed the preliminary list of potential e-navigation solutions, as work in
.2
above list should used as the basis for the
progress, and agreed that the be
the Formal
further identification of Risk Control Options, as preparation for
Safety Assessment (NAV 58/WP.6, annex 2); and
Analysing Process in
.3 endorsed the Methodology of the Human Element
e-navigation (NAV 58/6, annex 3).
with respect to the identified gap “lmproved competence of
6.40 The Secretariat,
reliability of systems and equipment”,
installation and repair person for providing better
relevant
clarified that It was not within the remit of the Organization or any of the
footriote
Sub-Committees. Accordingly, the Sub-Committee agreed to insert a suitable
indicating of Organization (NAV 58M’P.6/Rev.1,
that this was not within the purview the
annex 1 refers).
6.41 Sub-Committee also endorsed:
The
methodology, inciuding
.1 the procedure for the Formal Safety Assessment
and
the identiflcation of Risk Control Options (NAV 581WP.6, annex 3);
Service Portfolios.
.2 the further development of Maritime
6.42 The Sub-Committee agreed with the further development of:
equipment; and
.1 Guidelines for usability evaluation of navigational
.2 Guidelines for the harmonization of test beds.
relating to the completion date of the
6.43 The delegation of Japan requested clarification
e-navigation working
usability guidelines for navigational equipment. The Chairman of the
navigational
informed that a proposal cii draft guidelines for usability evaluation of
group
presented proposal for a strategy implementation plan
equiprnent was planned to be in the
I:\NAV5B14.doc
