NAV 58/14
Page 23
6.45 The delegation of Australia expressed view that document NAV 58/INF.6
the
(Nautical Institute) should also be Group.
referred to the Correspondence
6.46 In this context, the Secretariat clarified that the key issues, which should be taken
into account when developing usability guidelines navigational equipment, were already in
for
the report of the Correspondence
Group to NAV 57.
7 DEVELOPMENT OF POLICY AND NEW SYMBOLS FOR AlS AIDS TO
NAVIGATION
Sub-Corn
7.1 The mitee recalled that:
.1 MSC 86 had agreed to inciude, in the work programme of the
NAV symbols AlS aids to
Sub-Committee, a high-priority item on “New for
navigation”, with atargetcompletion date of 2013;
.2 NAV 56 had agreed It was premature to a correspondence
that establish
group on have a policy in
AlS AtoN symbology, as It was first imperative to
place before any major work was undertaken on this issue; and
.3 MSC had to include performance
88 agreed to expand the output
the expansion,
standards, guidance and policy on their use and, in view of
Aids
renamed the output “Development of policy and new symbols for AlS
to Navigation”.
correspondence
7.2 The Sub-Committee further recalled that NAV 57 had established a
was
group to make progress on this issue intersessionally. The Correspondence Group
instructed to consider documents NAV 56111 and NAV 57/8 (Japan) and NAV 57/8/2 (IALA),
inciuding comrnents made in Plenary relevant information, and develop a first
and any other
and review
draft of a policy for AlS Aids to Navigation and submit a report for consideration
by NAV 58.
The Sub-Committee (NAV which contained the
7.3 considered the report of the CG 58/7),
inciuding
first draft of the IMD policy and new symbols for AlS Aids to Navigation (annex 1)
two afternatives (A and B) for improved AlS AtoN symbols (annex 2) for future consideration
by the Sub-Committee subject to approval proposed draft policy.
of the
7.4 The Sub-Committee also considered document NAV 58/7/1 (Australia) commenting
on the report with respect to section — Definition; sections 4.5 and 4.6 — Permanent
3
appilcation of virtual AlS AtoN; section of AlS AtoN for voyage planning including
4.1.7 — use
need e.g. IEC with respect to
the to liaison with other international organizations, IALA and
symbols for AlS AtoN.
7.5 With regard to annex document NAV 58/7 on the proposed draft Policy on use
1 of
definition, a
of AlS Aids to Navigation and with reference to options 1 to 3 concerning the
majority of delegations that spoke on the issue were in favour of option 2 and the
Sub-Committee concurred with this. The Sub-Committee also discussed whether virtual
AlS Aids Navigation could basis and was of the view that,
to be established on a permanent
basis.
as a general rule, virtual AlS AtoN should not be used on a permanent
7.6 With respect to the development of new symbols for AlS AtoN (NAV 58/7, annex 2:
alternative A and alternative B), Sub-Committee was of the view that, at this moment in
the
addressed
time, it was rather premature to consider the issue and it would be better at
NAV59.
l:NAV58\14.doc
