4,
NAV
58/14
Page
36
13.42
The Sub-Committee noted that, at MSC 90, several delegations had expressed the
view
that there was a need for clarification on the application of SOLAS regufation V122 and
that there was no mandate for introducing a completely new exemption clause or new
requirements, which allowed for
flexible and changing blind sectors relating to Navigation
bridge visibillty inciuding the stowage
of containers forward of the wheelhouse above the line
of visibility on
a permanent basis, for which no justification Dr compelling neen had been
demonstrated. Furtherrnore, it was important that the vague expressions were fully clarified.
In this context, the IACS observer had stated that needed respect to the
clarification was with
following four main issues: the height and the
of the window lower edge was not defined
upper edge requirements
had been deleted from the revised regulation; requirements
relating to the size of the framing between navigational bridge front windows were not
defined; paragraph 5 of the draft revised regulation referred to the of computerized
use a
dyriamic loading program but it was not
dear as to what the requirements would be for such
a program
for the calculation of vsibility including what “other methods” would be available;
and, lastly, how the proposed revision of SOLAS regulation V/22 could be used in
combination with SOLAS regulation V/15, inciuding MSC/Circ.982.
its reference to
Accordingly, MSC had referred the back
90 draft revised text of SOLAS regulation V/22 to
NAV 58 for
reconsideration under the agenda item “Any other business”.
13.43 In the ensuing discussions, the following views were
expressed that:
.1 the Sub-Committee needed further guidance and dear instructions from the
Committee as to how to proceedfurther in matter. It was further noted
this
that this agenda item was no longer Action Plan
ineluded in the High-level
of the Organization and
it needed to be re-instated; and
.2 whether, the Sub-Committee in its further review of regulation V/22 should
be limited to only vague expressions or should review the entire regulation
other related
and all instruments.
13.44 In this context, the Sub-Committee decided to focus on whether was possible to
it
address individual issues and any consequential of the
effects on the remaining parts
regulation, SOLAS
in particular regulation V/153 and MSC/Circ.982 which is directly linked
to SOLAS regulation V/22.
13.45 A number of delegations spoke on the
issue and were of the view that the regulation
should be
reviewed comprehensively based on a goal-based approach to resolve the issue
from the root level. Some delegations supported revisiting only the four issues, as identified
in paragraphs 1.8, 1.9, 1.10.2 and 5 of the draft SOLAS regulation developed by
V/22
NAV 57 (NAV 57/15, annex 7). Others of approach
were the opinion that a more proactive
was
needed with limitations on the extent and scope of the review.
13.46 After an in-depth discussion, the Sub-Committee agreed in order to address
that,
the issues raised for all, it proper
once was necessary to have a output on the
Sub-Committee’s and
agenda that the most appropriate way forward was for a Member
Government to propose a new unplanned output for a full review of SOLAS regulation V/22,
including identification of which parts of the regulation should be addressed and what, if any,
new areas should be iricluded in the review. The also
proposed unplanried output should
include an additianal to ensure
task that there was no iriconsistency with other regulations
and documentation.
relating bridge
Principles to design, design and arrangement of navigational systems and equipment and
bridge procedures.
Guideilnes on ergonomic criteria for bridge equipment and layout.
I:NAV58\14.doc
