NAV 58114
Page 37
Committee to concur with
13.47 In light of the foregoing, the Sub-Committee invited the
a proper unplanned
the view that the issues raised at MSC 90 could not be resolved without
to submit an
output on the Sub-Committee’s agenda and also invited Member Governments
appropriate to MSC
proposal 91.
Caution on GNSS signal reception failure by radio interference
and
13.48 delegation of the Republic of Korea made a statement providing information
The
reception radio interference. The tect of the
a reminder of caution on GNSS signal failure by
statement is reproduced in annex 14.
Regional electronic in the East Asian seas
marine hlghway
provided update on the
13.49 Recalling that, at previous sessions, the Secretariat had an
Regional
key elements and expected outputs of the new project for the Development of a
the
Electronic Highway (MEH) in the Fast Asian seas inciuding the progress made,
Marine
in its sixth year of
Sub-Committee noted that the MEH Demonstration Project was
October 2011. the
implementation. Following the 4th Project Steering Committee Meeting in
November 2011
World Bank had carried out Implementation Evaluation on the Project in
an
and on the of activities and deliverables.
given a satisfactory mark based implementation
carried out the development of
During the period from January to June 2012, the Project
data feed for the MER
additional technical functionalities of the MEH IT system. In addition,
IT had been enhanced to include several remote stations in the Straits of Malacca
System
and
transmitting wind data. Work on the development
and Singapore current, tides and
into the MEH was also
integration of environment marine information overlays (E-MIOs)
MEH IT system
carried out by the Project team. Training on the operation and use of the
littoral States.
was held 24 to 27 April and attended by IT personnel from the three
from 2012
52 of which 18 were from the shipping
A Sea Trial involving land and sea-based entities,
objectives to test the MEH IT
sector was conducted from 28 March to 4 May 2012 with the
the MEH.
system communication link and the relevance of information being provided by
The 5th Project Steering Committee Meeting was held in Jakarta, Indonesia,
institutional sustainability of the MEH
from 6to 8 June 2012 and the main issues were the
IT system in Batam to
beyond the present Demonstration Phase, the handover of the MEH
closure of the
the Directorate General of Sea Transportation (DGST), Indonesia and the
Bank the of the Project to 31 December 2012.
Project. The World had approved extension
be conducted. It was expected
During this final extension period, a second sea trial would
General of Sea
that the MEH IT system would be handed over to Indonesia (Directorate
3 August 2012.
Transportation) on
Expressions of appreciation
had
Sub-Committee appreciation to the following delegates who
13.50 The expressed
to other duties or were about to,
recently relinquished their duties, retired or were transferred
long and happy retirement or,
for their invaluable contribution to its work and wished them a
as the case might be, every success in their new duties:
Cdr Roberto Annichini (Argentina) on their
- Captain Valentin Ruz Rodriguez and
return home;
Captain Douglas Beu (Bahamas) on his retirement;
-
on return home;
- Captain Ada Lorena Dimas Rodiiguez (Mexico)
Polderman his retirement;
- Mr. Kees (Netherlands) on
I:\NAV’581 4.dac
