58/14
NAV
Annex 3, page 5
ship reporting
3.3.2 Proprietary information obtained as a requirement of the mandatory
with the General
system Barents SRS will be protected under this system consistent
and requirements, inciuding
Principles for ship reporting systems ship reporting
andlor
guidelines for reporting incidents involving dangerous goods, harmful substances
marine po!lutants (resolution A.851(20)).
3.4 Geographical position for submitting reports
report
3.4.1 Ships entering the Barents SRS operational area shall submit a
into the area or on departure from a port or anchorage within
when entering
the operational area.
time
3.4.2 Reports forwarded prior to entering the area can be submitted at any
after the Norwegian Economic Zone or the Russian Federation
entering
until one hour before entering the Barents
Exclusive Economic Zone and
Services must be able to
SRS operational area. As the Vessel Traffic
handle incoming prior reporting, It will not be possible to undertake
later than one hour prior to entering the area.
pre-entry reports any
the SRS
3.4.3 Ships departing a part or leaving an anchorage within Barents
X
area, may also submit a pre-entry report for designators H, P, T, Q and
if hour prior to departure.
transmitted one
3.5 Authority
Maritime River Transport and the Norwegian
3.5.1 The Federal Agency of and
for Murmansk VTS centre
Coastal Administration are the VTS authorities
Barents SRS Ship
and Vardø VTS centre respectively which operate the
Reporting System.
be followed
4 Information to be provicled to ships and procedures to
Ships Barents SRS are required to keep a continuous listening watch on
4.1 in the area
VHF channel 16,
information about
1f requested, VTS centre concerned shail provide ships with
4.2 the
forecast, navigational warnings and other hazards in the ship
positioning, weather
devices up in the coastal States or by other
reporting area, from broadcasting set
available comrriunication means concurred by involved participants.
centre provide individual information to a ship particularly
4.3 1f necessary, the VTS can
in relation to posltioning or local conditions.
1f a ship needs duo to breakdown, low visibility, adverse weather, etc., the
4.4 to anchor
recommend suitable anchorages or other places of
VTS centre concerned can
refuge within the operational area.
requlred the Barents SRS system
6 Communication for
English, using IMO Standard Marine
5.1 The language used for communication shali be
centre concerned.
Communication Phrases, when deemed necessary by the VTS
of contact information are given in appendix 2.
5.2 Details communication and
I:NAV58\1 4.doc
