NAV 58!14
Annex 14,
page 1
ANNEX 14
STATEMENT THE KOREA
BY DELEGATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF
AT THE 58TH
SESSION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON SAFETY OF NAVIGATION
Thank you Mr.
Chairman,
This is a report and reminder of caution on GNSS signal reception failure by radio
interference.
The Republic of Korea would like to report that there was a case of serious threats
posed to hinder safe navigation, which reception faNure by radio
was caused by GNSS signal
interference occurred recently in the Yellow Sea off the Republic of Korea.
According to Paragraph 2.1.6 of Rule 19, Chapter V of the SOLAS convention, all ships
irrespective of size shail be required to be a receiver of a global navigation satellite system or a
terrestrial radionavigation system, or other means, suitable for all times throughout the
use at
intended voyage to establish
and update the ship’s position by automatic means.
Consequently, a device for GNSS reception was recognized as one of the
mandatory position-fixing equipment for Woridwide Radionavigation System (WWRNS) by
Resolution recognized
A.915(22) adopted in 2001. A GNSS reception device has been as
useful
and mandatory equipment for identifying a ship’s position; therefore, GNSS has been
recently installed on the majority of vessels.
In addition to the function identify has been used for a
to a ship’s position, GNSS
wide range of navigation equipment, such as Automatic Identification System (AlS) and
Electronic Chart Display and Information Systems (ECDIS). Furthermore, GNSS has been
used for assisting emergency operations in conjunction with Long-Range identification and
Tracking of ships (LRIT) and System (SSAS). In other words, GNSS is
Ship Security Alert
known as of the most
one essentie 1 equipment for safe navigation.
However, the Government of the Republic of Korea received reports informing that
merchant ships and airplanes the Yellow Korea, specifically in the
in Sea off the Republic of
Ports failed to
waters off the of Incheon, Pyeongtaek, and Daesan, had repeatedly receive
GNSS signals between some minutes to some hours from 07:49 April 28 to 20:47 May 13, 2012.
As was stated in document NAV 57/6/2, submitted by the Republic of Korea, such GNSS
signal interference had already
occurred more than three times in August 2010.
The cause of this GNSS signal failure was attributed to a strong jamming
(signal interference) directed toward the vessels and airplanes installed with GNSS reception
devices. GNSS, receiving a signal from a satellite at about 20,000km above the ground
level, is highly vulnerable to such a signal interference coming from the ground level.
The YelIow Sea off the Republic of Korea where the GNSS signal failure occurred is
frequently used as a major route by more than 1,000 vessels a day navigating among such
countries as the Republic Taking account heavy
of Korea, Japan, and China. into the traffic
bad composed of large oil tankers and cruise ships in the region, it is not unreasonable to
expect that GNSS signal interference would leed to serious marine accidents or pollution.
Therefore, the Republic of Korea would like to stress that, in view of the fact that GNSS
is one of the mast critical navigational systems; all stakeholders should take all the necessary
actions to prevent GNSS signal interference that may lead to hamper safe riavigation.
This delegation would like to request this Sub-Committee to reflect its statement in
the dreft report.
I:\NAV\58\14.doc
