Cover report on the (formal) saety assessments for 26 maart 2012
1
Executive summary
Organisation of the FSA
Assessment,
In order to arrive at a widely supported and thoroughly argumented Formal Safety
this FSA process of the Dutch proposals has seen the Invoivement of a
for routeing measures
number of organisations. This cover report hes been drafted by Arcadis (UK) and the Dutch
the
Ministry of Infrastructure and the nvIronment (the competent authority representing
Netherlands in IMO). The report summarizes and Interprets the resuits of three separate
assessments: the FSA/HAZID (iargeIy qualitative assessment based on expert jucigement), a
assessrnents
Quantitative Risk Analysis (QRA) and a Munitlons Risk Analysis (MRA). These three
were commissioned by the Dutch Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment and the Port of
of farni
Rotterdam, after consultation with the Port of Amsterdam and a Consortium wind
attended by representatives
developers. The FSA/HAZID assessment Inciuded en expert workshop
experts from Dutch assessments were undertaken by
and nautical the marine sector. The three
competent professionals from Arcadis (UK), MARIN and TNO respectively.
Objectives
This FSA Is used as a taal to help in the evaluatlon of the new spatial plans In the Dutch EEZ, i.e.
measures. Objectives of
the IMO variant, in pafticular the proposal for the review of ships routeing
the FSA are twofold. First, to identify and lmprove a number of shortcomings In the present
shipping route system from e purely nautical point of view. Second, to optimize spatial planning at
shipping within close proximity to
the North Sea by facilitating safe and efficlent navigatlon to
existing future wind farms gas Installations and the safety and protection of these
and and all and
assets themselves.
Baseline scenarios
The (quantitative) QRA and the (qualitatlve) FSA/HAZID assessment consider and compare three
windfarms and proposed
spatial “varlants”, The new “IMO Variant” all so-called round 2
(=
routeing Implemented) is compared following Variants:
wlth the
a Present situation with two windfarms in place and wlndfarm Q1O marked as a construction
implemented wlth old routeing system);
area for Wind farms existing wind farms and Q1O
(=
and
b. Variant Nol of the FSA2O1O (all 8 so-cailed 2nd round Windfarms Implemented wlth old
routeing system).
The MRA has different baselines, as the study Is orierited locally. In the MRA, two new routeing
vicinity the
design alternatives are compared to the present (old) routeing system In the of
munitions dump sites. One of the “new” designs is equal to the proposed routeing measures; the
systems
other represents en Intermediate, alternative design. For each of these three routeing
baseline of no routeing measures is
(the present, the proposed and the alternative), en operational
In the situation measures compared with a situation with recommended
place; wlth no routeing is
routeing measures.
Resuits of risk and safety assessments
Both QRA and FSA/HAZID come to the conclusion that the IMO variant Is the safest variant of the
cumulatlon of risk scores which show
three varients studied. Both studies base this concluslon on a
net decrease for the IMO variant In comparison to the other two varlants,
a
down according to the QRA, risks decrease for
The QRA categorically breaks the net risk score:
some situations, for example strandings, and increase for others, such as ship to ship collisions.
Pagina 8 of 44
