Cover report on the (formal) safety assessments for 26 maart 2012
1
The FSA/HAZID
locelly breaks down the net risk score: according to the FSA/HAZID, rlsks
decrease Cor remain the same) the main hotspots of the present route structure. Although both
in
studies agree that net risks decrease, the FSA/HAZJD seems more optimistic about the amount
whlch
with the risk decreases.
The methodologles of the FSAIHAZJD and QRA assessments both have their advantages and
disadvantages and are FSA/HAZID assessment’s strength Is Its basis of
complementary. The main
expert judgement and real-life nuances. The MARIN QRA is numerical and therefore relatively
objective in the comparison between the levels of risk for the three varlants.consldered. Limitatlon
of account.
the QRA Is that It does not take the possible actions of shlps’ officers Into
Whilst QRA and FSA/HAZID alm to assess the IMO variant as a whole, the MRA’s objective was to
assess the particular situatlon around the munition dump sites and propose optimal routeing
design and mitigating measures In this specific area. MRA has laad to an Intermediate re
The
design of the routeing measures during the design process and to proposals for Areas to be
Avoided as well as additlonal markings.
Risk Control Measures
The design first IMO Variant,
of the new routeing measures has been an Iterative process. A
version September 2011 has been subjected to varlous revlews, which lead to new versions and
adjusted designs, ultimately culminating In the IMO Variant, Februari 2012 final verslon, All
deslgn-steps between the September 2011 and Februari 2012 verslons of the IMO Variant design
are considered acts of Risk Control.
proposed routeing
The following three kinds of Risk Control Options have been Implemented in the
design.
1) Risk Control measures to reduce risk at known hotspots In the present routeing system, being:
traffic routeing system In the approaches to Ijmuiden that separates Inbound from
• a
outbound traffic Tanes and restrlcts the crosslng of these lanes by north and south going
vessels within two proposed precautlonary areas.
• adjustment of the western boundary of the Ijmuiden deep-water approach area westwards
In order to provide more maneuveririg space for deep draft vessels adjusting their headlng
and speed when embarklng or dlsembarking a pilot by helicopter.
deep-water channel leading to for Inbound deep draft
• an emergency turning area In the
vessels to turn around and return to deeper water 1f the port entrance Is suddenly
obstructed.
• a second south bound branch the southwestern end of the TSS 0ff Texel’s
lane at
exterided lane aligned wlth the southbound routeing In the precautionary area Maas
Junction to direct traffic for Schouwenbank away from the current hot spot at the Horizon
the risk of collislon this Locatlon,
platform and reduce at
• re-alignment of the northeast bound lane of TSS North Hinder North In order to avold
vessels passing excesslvely close to the Horizon platform.
2) Risk Control measures to optlmlse overall risk to a minimum level, being:
to
• moving the traffic separation scheme Maas North 4.5 mi les to the west In order create
more anchoring space the approaches to IJmuiden and to avold ships anchorlng In the
In
traffic flows from the TSS Maas North to the TSS 0ff Texel.
• adjusting the boundaries of the TSS 0ff Texel’s northeast bound traffic lane so that the
Vlnca Gorthon wreck outside effectively lncreaslng the lane’s wldth.
is the lane, so
Pagina 44
9 of
