Cover report 0fl the (formal) satety assessments
for 26 maart 2012
• extending the southwest bound lane of the
traffic TSS 01f Texel and provide a south goTng
branch
aligned with the precautionary area IJmuiden Crossing and TSS to
Maas North
direct traffic for IJmuiden
and Hook of Holland.
• moving the traffic separation schemes Maas West Inner, the
Maas West Outer and the
Maas Northwest
to accommodate shifting traffic separation scheme Maas North west.
• re-aligning the precautlonary
area Maas Junction to an almost north south direction in
/
order to create a better crossing angle and subsequently reduce the collislon
risk of In the
crossing. The re-aiignment
also reduces the number and locations of possibie risk of
collision encounters with small crossing
angles between ships in the general area west of
IJmuiden,
• extending
the current inshore traffic zone in order to inciude the entrance to the
Oosterschelde in order aliow coastal
to small vessels tradlng between the Maas and the
Oosterschelde to use the lnshore traffic zone, instead of going
thraugh the traffic
separation
scheme Maas West Inner and the precautlonary area Maas Junction.
• amending the boundaries of
the precautlonary area Maas Centre to accommodate the
moving of the TSS Maas North 4.5 miles to the
west.
• providing two emergency
turning areas In the deep-water channel leading to Europoort for
inbound deep draft vessels to turn around
and return to deeper water 1f the port entrance
is suddenly
obstructed. The Deep Water route is extended to the breakwater
at the
entrance Europoort
to and its seaward end is extended for ships Inbound from the
southwest,
• removing the areas to be avolded around the North Hinder and the Maas Centre
buoys, as
these are necessary
no longer and their removal will provide ships with more maneuvering
space in the precautionary areas
North Hinder and Maas Centre.
3) Risk Control measures
to mitigate risks that mlght occur as a result of the new design, being:
• a new precautionary area “Rljnveld”
where southbound and northbound vessels for and
from the arnended precautlonary area Maas Junction traffic out
and In and of the traffic
separation
scheme Maas Northwest cross er merge with northeast bound vessels from the
traffic separation scheme North Hinder North.
• a recommencied south bound direction of traffic flow from bound
the second south lane
branching
off the extended southwest bound lane of the traffic separatlon scheme 0ff
Texel in paragraph ‘15’ to the end of the RIjnveld.
north precautlonary area
•
areas to be avoided Immediately over the ammunitlons dump sites olf Hoek of Holland
and
IJmuiden to avoid ships
sailing and anchoring over the dump sites, The safety of
navigation in the vicinity of the ammunition dumps
Is thus maintained and even improved
by the
site at Hoek of Holland being within the TSS North separatlon
Maas zone.
• an area to avoided around
be the De Ruyter gas and oil Installatlon and Its loading faciiity
to gulde traffic coming from Breeveertlen
safely beyond the installation and to allow
sufficient
space for berthing and unberthing a tanker on the Single Buoy Mooring.
The following further Risk Control options are not part of the proposed
route structure but can be
considered
in the (neer) future:
• Residuai Risk Control
Options during the design of new wind farms, inciuding aiignment of
turbines, appropriate marks and lightlng, installation
of safety zones and an emergency
service
revlew.
• Residual Risk Control
Options during the implementation of the new routeing system,
iricluding a revlew of anchorage areas (It
should be noted that this is currently undertaken
the
by Dutch authorities, but not as part of the IMO submlssions process) and
communications through notices
to mariners and other appropriate media such as charts.
Pagina O of 44
