Cover report
on the (forrnaI) saety assessm6nLs lor 26 maart 2012
R.H.B. Bouma Risk
PhD Analysis expert TNO
R.M.M, van Wees MSc Reviewer
TNO
12 FSA objectives
This FSA is used as a tool to help in the
evaluatlon of the new spatial plans In the Dutch EEZ, le.
the IMO variant,
in partlcular the proposal for the revlew of shlps measures. of
routeing Objectives
the FSA are twofold. First,
to Ideritify and lmprove a number of shortcomlngs In the present
shipping route system from a purely nautical of view. Second,
point to optimize spatial planning at
the North Sea
by facilitating safe and efficlent navigation to shipplng within proximity
close to
existlng and future wind
farms and oh and gas Installations and the safety and protection of these
assets themselves.
1.3 FSA context
The current FSA study and report
and Its baselines was preceded by a number of everits. The
Dutch Ministry
of Infrastructure and the Environment (Rijkswaterstaat), in close wlth
cooperation a
number of offshore devehopers,
has since a riumber of years developed spatial plans for the North
Sea, to synchronize the
spatial needs of varlous marine uses. An important trigger to this process
Is the growth of Initlatives for offshore windfarms. Wlth this
goal In n,ind, as early as 2010, a series
of Routeing Variatlons
for shipping off the Dutch coast were analyzed In a Navigational Risk Review
of Wind Park Development Dutch
In Waters, also referred to as a Formal Safety Assessment (Ref
259-7051 HZ 01, l5th October 2010, hereafter FSA2O1O).
called The Intention of these 2010
analyses was
to Identlfy the best possible mutual Iayout of wind farms, shipping routes and
and oil
gas Instahlatlons out varlants (1
of five and 2a through 6A). It should be noted that the 2010
proposals and FSA did not result In an IMO submission, the
but did Influence scope and decision
making this
In present FSA process.
In 2011, changirig prioritles related to the wind energy sector new
lead to a focus In this
development
process. The no-regret measures to lncrease safety in the Dutch EEZ were
that
ldentlfied In 2010 and the
two most favourable Varlants from the FSA2OIO were taken as a basis to
devehop a new spatlal plan for shlpping and wind energy
farms. This culmlnated In the production
of a new variant,
hereafter called the “IMO Variant (verslon September 2011)”. The IMO variant
Inciudes a number of proposals for
routeing measures, which are submltted as an array of 9
submlsslons to the IMO NAV subcommlttee approval
for In July 2012.
The InItlal IMO Variant,
verslon September has been subjected to various assessments as detalled
below. After several iteratlons of the routing resulted
design this in the IMO Variant 12.12,11. This
was subjected
Variant to a ftirther FSA/HAZID Analysis with notable improvement
In comparison to
the intermediate draft
IMO variants. Assessments were also applled to the Present situatlon and
Variant lof the FSA2O1O.
1.4 FSA methodology
FSA Is a structured and systematic
methodology, almed at enhancing marltime safety. It Is
regarded that maritime safety Includes the protectiori life, health, the marine environment
of and
property.
The assessmerit uses proven approaches of risk analysis and cost benefit analyses and
comparlsons between exlstlng and
possibly Improved regulations. The FSA Is almed at achleving a
balance between the various technlcal and operational Issues, and between maritime
safety or
protectlon of the
marine environment and costs.
The Formal Safety Assessrnent process, Ihlustrated In Flgure 1, Is
applled withln this study. This Is a
and systernatic
structured methodology based on risk analysls and cost beneflt assessment (if
applicable). There are five basic steps process:
within this
Identificatlon of
1. hazards (a list of all relevant accident scenarlos wlth potential causes and
outcomes);
2. Assessment
of risks (evaluatlon of risk factors);
Pagina 13 o144
