Cover report on the (format) aatety assessment5 ror 26 maart 20i2
1
3. Risk control
options (devising regulatory measures to control and reduce the ldentlfled risks);
4. Cost benefit assessment (determining cost effectiveness of risk control measures); and
S. Recorrimendations for declsion-making (information about the hazards, thelr associated risks
and the cost effectiveness af alternative risk control measures).
Figure 1 FSA steps
1.5 FSA organisation
The FSA has been carried out along three separate, largely parallel paths, which have culminated in
this one report (see also Figure 2):
1) A qualitatlvely based FSA
The study is underteken by Arcadis (UK) and named “Formal Safety Assessment, a qualitative risk
assessment the proposed the
for route structure In the !Jorth Sea’ The study addresses all steps of
FSA method, Its risk FSA/HAZID
assessment part is based on expert judgement according to the
method. The report is inciuded as Appendix 1; the results of the study are integraliy discussed in
this cover report.
The study is hereafter referred to as “FSA/HAZID”.
2) A Quantitative Ri5k Assessment (QRA)
The study
Is undertaken by the Maritime Research Institute Netherlands (MARIN) and named
“Quantitative Risk Assessment for the proposed route structure in the North Sea”. The QRA
addresses step 2 of the FSA method and complements the expert judgement of FSA/I-IAZID
assessment Appendix 2;
to Jointly form the basis of the Risk Assessment. The report Is inciuded as
the results of the study are integrally dlscussed in thIs cove report. Is hereafter referred
The study
to as “QRA”.
3) A Munitions Risk Assessment of Sea shipping routes with regard to
(MRA) North
munitlons dump sites
During Holland
the hazard identification phase, two ammunition dumps off Ijmuiden and Hook of
were ideritified as potential nearby shipping routes, The
hazards In relation to the proposed
Netherlands Organisation for Appiled Scientific Research (TNO), a research institute speciallsed in
the subject matter on the sites. The
of munitlons, was asked to carry out a separate risk analysis
study addresses ammurlition-specific aspects of 2, 3 and 5 of the FSA method:
step
• to provide an objective assessment of the absolute and relative rlsks in the vicinity of the
dump sites;
• to assess the effect of risk mitigating measures on risk levels; and
• to provide a decision making basis for the design of routelng measures and other risk
mitlgating measures
in the vicinity of the dump sites.
Pagina 14 oF 44
