report on the (formal) for 2012
Cover safety assessments 1 26 maart
design could be optimized,
A preliminary assessment demonstrateci that the 20.09.11 IMO variant
which resuited in the IMO variant 12.12,11, A summary of the report is inciuded as Appendix 3;
the resuits of the study are integraily discussed in this cover report.
The integration of the three paths and reports has been a joint and ongoing effort, wlth a
coordlnating roie by Arcadis.
FSA Cover Report
(this report)
1
(Arcadis (MARIN Quantitatlve’ Munitions Rlsk
qualit
FSA-FSA/HAZID Risk Assessment Assessment
1 1
1
(MRA)
(QF&A)
process
Figure 2 Organisation of the FSA
1.6 Baseline scenanos
Eoth QRA and the FSA/HAZID consider and compare three spatial “variants”. The new “JMO
Variant” ah round 2 windfarms and proposed routeing impiemented) is compared with the
(=
fohlowing Variants:
a Present situation with windfarm Q10 marked as a construction area for Wind farms existing
(=
wind farms and Q10 impiemented with old routeing systern); and
Windfarms implemented with old routeing
b. Variant Nol of the FSA2O1O (all so-calied 2nd round
system).
different is oriented locaily. In the MRA, two new routeing
The MRA has basehines, as the study
design alternatives are compared to the present (old) routeing system in the vicinity of the
measures; the
munitions dump sites. One of the “new” designs Is equal to the proposed routeing
alternative design. For each these three routeing systems (the
other represents an intermediate, of
present, the proposed and the alternative), an operationai baseline of no routeing measures is in
recommended
place; the situation with no routeing measures is compared wlth a situation with
routelng measures.
1.7 FSA process flowchart
the preiiminary studies
The complex process that was followed to arrive at this FSA report Inciuded
methodology described in paragraph 1.4, the FSA
described in paragraph 1.3, the iterative FSA
organisatlon over three consulting parties as described in paragraph 1.5 and baseiine comparisons
is giveri in Figure FSA
as described Ir, paragraph 1.6. An overvlew of the resuiting process 3, the
flowchart. This as guidance reading of the remainder of the
process may help the reader during
report.
1.8 Report Structure
2 of this report the preliminaries to this FSA study. First, those observations of
Chapter addresses
variant. Second, the
prevlous studies are discussed, that have formed the backbone of the IMO
that are used as references for the risk level of
chapter presents details of the baseilne scenario’s
ING variant In both the FSA/HAZID and QRA.
the
and of Methodology, that is, the
Chapters 3 of this report deals with Steps 1 2 the FSA FSA/HAZID
Identification and the Risk Assessment. Resuits are discussed for the FSA/HAZ!D, QRA and MRA.
Palna iS of 44
__
__
[
(o
