report tie (rormal) 26 maart 2012
Cover au safety aasessments for
(Steps 1. & 2)
3. Hazard Identification & Risk Assessment
3.1 Introduction
and
out along three separate, largeiy parallel
As explained in chapter 1, the FSA has been carried
MRA.
lnterconnected studies, whlch have culminated in this one report: the FSA/HAZID, QRA and
3.1 to 3,4). For each study,
This chapter first addresses the three studies in isolation (paragraphs
and actions and assess risks are explined, as well as their resuits.
processes to identlfy hazards
when the three
Paragraph 3.5 contains discussions of the combined observatlons and conclusions
progresslon of the studies, although
studies are compared. It should be noted that the real-life
integrally organlsed was sometimes unstructured or iterative. The report In this
and managed,
the same time
chapter Is therefore structured in a logical manner for the reader, whilst at
order as ciose to describlng the
attempting to, where possible, retain a chronologicai and stay
possible.
research-process as
risk assessment
3.2 FSA/HAZID hazard identification and qualltative
3.2.1 Methodology
approach which Incorporates a structured
The FSA/HAZID method uses a team based
the particIpants.
brainstorming technique in a workshop setting, used to draw out information from
Is to ldentify hazards capable to
The team is made up of appropriately qualified persons. The alm
for
as well as the current and recommended control measures
ieading to undesirable consequences
consequences and
each hazard. The hazards are further assessed in terms of the associated
supervislon af experts with both
frequency of occurrence. The FSA/HAZID is carried out under
(UK).
experience, in the present case two experts from Arcadis
strong nautical and methodoiogicai
with relevant
Apart from leading the workshop, the supervisors have carried out interviews
workshop
run op workshop as well as after the
experts, industries and organisatlons, in the to the
clarify polnts and compiement the workshop resuits. As part of this broader
to outstanding
marine activities other than
inventory, the supervisors have undertaken action to Identify relevant
to the FSA/HAZID process.
shipping itself, that form externai influences
“Variant IMO” is
The FSA/HAZID considers and compares three spatlai “variants”. The new
cornpared with the foliowing Variants:
construction area for
• Present routeing situation wlth with windfarm Q10 marked as a
Wind farms; and
so-calied 2nd round Windfarms implemented with
• Variant No.1 of the FSA2O1O (all
present route stnJcture kept In place).
of the of Externai Hazard Influences and the
The below paragraphs outilne the resuits inventory
of the FSA/HAZID assessment.
resuits
3.2.2 External Hazard Influences
objectlve approach to the
The foilowing externai data were gathered to give a mast realistlc and
FSA/HAZID findings:
Ijmuiden
1. Near Misses in the Approaches to
Exploration of Small 011/Gas Fields (changes since 2008)
2.
3. Offshore Windfarms
Traffic for Port of Amsterdam (changes since 2008)
4. Increased Tanker
5. Near from 011/Gas Platforms (Present Situation)
Misses
observatlons below. The reader wlth a Interest In detailed
The main are first summarized
1.
describtions of the nature of the external hazard lnfluences, is referred to Appendix
Ijmuiden and near misses with Gil/gas platforms are of
1. Near misses in the approaches to
organisation of shipping In the
great signlflcance and readily Illustrate the need for more
Pagne 25 of44
