Cover report on the ((ormal)
safety assessments for 26 maart 2012
1
area under
consideration and the assets. Greater control and lnfluence of VTS should be a
mitlgating factor and a
fact finding vlsit to the VTS station confirmed the need for this
additlonal control.
2. The Neer misses in the approaches to Ijmuiden are disturbing In that all the incidents relate
to the mlsinterpretation and/or understandlng of the Coilislon Regulations. The situatlon for
the
approaches to Ijmuiden can be lmproved by:
• deslgnation of a TSS;
• better utilization of the VTS of the competent authority at Ijmuiden (CNB), giving
them greater control and
authority; in addition to
• repositioning of the existing anchorage
areas.
3. It Is dear that the
Dutch government is proactive In thelr commltment and support to Wind
Parks as a form of sustainable energy. However, this commitment and progress must be
mime wlth an established safety regime.
4. The existing farms, OWEZ and PAWP have froved successful which has laid a firm
foundation
for the encouragement for further exploration which is evidenced In the 12
licensed wind farms under consideration,
5. The trend Is up with dear optimism from Amsterdam Port which hes maintained its position
in the fourth piece of European
ports. Tanker traffic Is clearly on the lncrease and measures
must be in place to address this trend.
6. Major Is
concern registered at the apparent Indifterence to the safety zones around
windfarm and 011/gas assets. A 72% increase In vlolations of Safety Zones In 2010 over
2009
is a disturbing statistic.
3.2.3 ESA/HAZID assessment resuits
The FSA/HAZID results great
include a amount of detailed assessment of local situations, outlined
in the series of tables appended to the FSA/HAZID report. This paragraph will highiight the results
for the mein locatlons, as wall as the overall risk scores of the three veriants considered,
FSA/HAZID overview charts of the three compared variants (Present traffic routelng worksheet,
representing the present traffic routelng structure and the assumed realizatlon of Q10 wind farm;
Variant 1 traffic routelng worksheet, assuming that all round 2 wmndfarms are realized, but the
traffic routes remain as they are; IMO variant trafl9c relevant
routeing worksheet) wlth numbering
are included in Figure 10 to Figure 12.
The following risk scores or high-end yellow particularly notebie in
scores around the value 12 are
the present traffic routlng worksheets:
Horizon Platform - Point Sg: SSW going ships for Schouwenbarik, WSW going ships and NWxN/
SExS going deep draft ships cross NE going traffic close to the Horizon gas platform. The gas
platform Is
right on the Western edge of the NE and SSW goiny traffic lanes. Concern exiets that
NWxN and WSW going vessels alter course towards the gas platform when giving way.
Entrance to 0ff Texel TSS
- Point 5j: NExE, NExN and NxNE going ships merge with NE going
traffic at the entrance to the 0ff Texel where lane
TSS the wldth of the approach to the NE width is
halved by the buoyed Vlnca Gorthon wreck at a depth of 1O.8m. Close quarters sltuatlons between
merging
trafflc at large aspect eng les can cause doubt as to whether it is a crossing or en
overtaking situatlon and which is the stand vessel, precludes course
on The wreck a large
alteratlon to starboard, so a give way ship in this situatlon should reduce speed.
Approaches to Ijmuiden - Points ila, e, i,j: (sea lie:) ENE gaing ships for the Inner
g, h,
falrway
buoy pass the site for wind park Q10 to starboard with a minimum clearance of about
0.5nm. This may be hazardous, as collisions could vessels in constructing the
occur wlth engaged
wind park or a ship breaking down at close distance and drifting into a wind turbine. (see11e) A
Pagina 26 of 44
