Cover report on the (formal) saety assessments for 26 maart 20fl
1
going inbound traffic,
bit further along this ENE route, NxE going inbound ships merge wlth all ExS
at large aspect angles. cause doubt as to whether It is a
leadlng to close quarter situatlons This can
going
or an overtaking which is the stand on vessel. (See lig:) All WxN
crosslng situatlon and
pass anchorage. Shlps may join the
outbound traffic and ExS inbound deep dreft vessels the Inner
the side, whlch means thay must give way to all WxN
Inbound lane from the anchorage from port
vessels In a
going traffic but at the same time they are the stand on vessel to ExS going deep draft
colregs. (See 11h:) at this
close quarters situatlon, This yields a amblguous situation in terms of
deep dreft give way to SSE going ships. This Is potentially
point WxN going vessels must
not be
hazardous, as deep draft vessels are restricted in their ablllty to mcve and therefore may
ships from the Maas North TSS
able to comply wlth their duty to give way. (See lii:) NxW going
all Inbound deep draft vessels, and outbound W going traftic.
cross E going traffic, inciuding
NxW going
Inbound E going traffic inciuding vessels In the deep water channel must glve way tot
traffic. the deep dreft vessels are
ships that must give way to all outbound W going However,
give
therefore not be able to comply wlth their duty to
restricted In thelr ablilty to move and may
way. (See lij:) At this crosslng NE bound ships coming from Schouwenbank cross Southbound
going to Ijmuiden, Including
shlps to the Maas North TSS and East bound deep draft vessels
deep draft channel, restricted in their ability to move and therefore may
vessels In the which are
not be able to cemply wlth thelr duty to give way.
assumed all round 2 wind farms will be bulit In the future, additlonal polnts
1f furthermore It Is that
wind
of arise araund the Breeveertien windfarm - Point 3e and West Rijn farm -
concern
obscured onboard visual and reder
Point Bd. In both locations poor vIsibility situatlons can bad to
between crossing vessels.
detection In close quarter encounters
attention colour yeflow or
In the FSA/HAZID Worksheets of the IMO variant the above polnts of
that have been solved. Note that no new red scores are incurred
green, Indicating the bottlenecks
to the
Into the worksheet in the appendices, this can be ascrlbed
either. Looklng FSA/HAZID
following features of the proposed IMO variant routeing design.
bound traffk lane
Horizon pIatform In the IMO variant, the extended southwest
1. Around
for Schouwenbank via amended
of the 0ff Texel traffic separation scheme obliges shlps the
continue the southwest lane until they reach the
Maas Junction precautlonary area to In
branch lane, rather turning south-southwest as seen as they exit the
south bound than
spot’ at the
current traffic lane, This reduces the traffic passing through the current ‘hot
the bound lane of North
Horizon menned oil platform. Furthermore, re-aligning northeast
vessels to pass the Horizon platform at a
Hinder North traffic separation scheme dlrects
greater distance does.
than It currently
ships from the Maas North to the 0ff Texel
2. Entrance to 0ff Texel TSS In the IMO variant,
are directed to join northeast golng traffic about 10 mlles
traffic separation schemes
currently
of where they currently do and so the congestlon of merglng traffic that
southwest
bound lane Is reduced. The adjusted
occurs at the south end of the 0ff Texel northeast
separatlon scheme’s northeast bound traffic ene also puts
boundaries of the 0ff Texel traff9c
width.
of the bene, so effectively increaslng the lane’s
the Vinca Gorthon wreck outslde
North and the Texel traffic
The approaches to Ijmuiden: Traffic between the Maas
3.
a
directed cross the deep-water route leading to IJmuiden In
separatlon schemes is to
vessels to
precautlonary area of the deep-water channel and so deep dreft have room
west
Furthermore, the traffic
the proper evaslve action in risk of collision encounters.
take
to IJmuiden will prevent the crossing encounters
separation scheme In the approaches
traffic that currently occur, whilst north and south going
between Inbound and outbound
more anchorage
ships cross the scheme in just the two precautionary areas. This albows for
that inbound shlps do not cross the
areas on the south side of the separatlon scheme so
lane er departing from the anchorages.
outbound when arriving at
The IMO variant provides greater
4. Around Breeveertien and West Rijn Wlndfarms;
parks variant 1. Note that clearance is stili
clearance between shipping and the wind than
but the
miie end 0ff Texel extended southwest bound lane,
less than a neer the of the
is not a high risk of a
junction shadowed by the wind park Is a diverging one so there
being
potentially dangerous crossing encounter obscured.
Paqina 27 of 44
