Cover raport
on the (formal) safety assessments for 26 maart 2012
1
close
quarters encounters, based on the angle between the two vesseis’ courses and their relative
speeds, Although collislon between two collisions
a vessels is perhaps the main risk, stranding and
between a vessel and a wind turbine or offshore platform are also taken account.
into
The software must be programmed wlth vessels
a definltion of a close quarters encounter (e.g. two
passing iess than half a mlie of cach other) and MARIN divides close quarters encounters Into three
categories, 600,
namely: ‘overtaking’ where the difference in courses Is iess than ‘crossing’ where
600
the difference In courses is between and 1500 courses Is
and ‘end on’ where the difterence In
1500
between and 180°. It must be noted that these deflnitlons are not the same as those given In
the “International for
regulatlons preventing colilsions at sea” (otherwise known as the ‘Colregs’ or
the ‘Rule of the Road’), whlch state the rules by whlch shlps should these three
behave in each of
types of a ciose quarters encounter.
The calculations are performed without any risk reducing measures.
The
QRA, like the FSA/HAZID, corisiders and compares three spatial “variants”. The new “Variant
IMO” is compared with the followlng Variants:
• Present sitijation wlth windfarm Q10 marked as a construction area for Wind farms; and
• Variant
No.1 of the FSA2O1O (all so-called 2nd round Windfarms Implemented).
3.32
QRA Calcutation Results
Table 1 shows calculated ilkelihoods and for considered ships’
costs each variant of wind farn and
routeing configuration. The left part of Table 1 contains the probabilities that a wind turbine is lost.
The center part of the table contains the yearly costs of accidents with the wind farm and of
accldents and extra miles
outside the wind farm. By comparing the columns, t becomes dear that
the largest contribution of the yeariy costs is deilvered by costs of the extra miles. Thereafter, the
damage to the wind turbines gives the largest contribution.
Only the proposed route structure reduces the number of shipping incidents. The extra ncidents
0,206
wlth the wind farms are completely compensated by the decrease of 0,283 incidents outside
the wind farms. In summary, 0,076 less incldents will incident
occur per year, thus on average one
less In 13 years.
PaGIna 32 of 44
