Cover rapor-t the (formal)
0fl safety aesessments for 26 maart 2012
1
3.3.3 QRA Conciusions
The results of the QRA
for the proposed route structure without wind have been
farms compared to
the results of a base variant. The
resuits in case the wind farms licensed in round 2 are built, are
compared wlth variant 1, thus the variant without additional
routeing measures. The following
conclusions can be
drawn.
The
proposed route structure is the best option with respect
to safety. k is the only variant for
whlch the total number
of incldents with shipplng will decrease,
The main
impacts ori safety by the proposed route structure follows:
are as
Increase of risk
more
• 0,153 ships will be Involved In a collision.
The lncrease Is mainly caused by an
lncrease of the
number of overtaking collisions, and by the higher concentratlon of
shlpplng. The number of head-on
collislons sllghtly decreases by the separatlon of the
traffic in opposite directions.
a small increase
of the probability of the incidents that are related the number of
to sea
miles, such as foundering, hulI fallure and
fire/exploslon;
Decrease of risk
• a decrease In the probablilty of a stranding;
decrease
• a In the probability of a contact wlth a platform;
• a decrease In
the probability of a contact wlth a ship at arichor;
The summation of all
Incidents outside the wind farrns delivers a change -0.283 incldents
of with
shipping per year, thus
on average 1 incident less in 3.5 years.
Much
of the profit of 0.283 fewer lncidents outside the wind Is offset by ramming
and driftirig
contacts wlth the wind turbines.
When all the wind farms are built 0.206 contacts wlth wind
turbines are expected, Then In total 0.076 fewer lncidents
are expected, thus on average 1 incident
less
in 13 years,
The impact on the probablilties of a
contact against a platform fluctuates strorigly. The rlsks for
some
platforms decrease, for example for the platforms Horizon
and P18, whlle the risks for other
platforms Increase, The
collislon risk for Horizon due to a route-bound shlp decreases by 25%.
Despite this reduction, Horizon remains platform
the w)th the highest collision risk. In total, a sllght
reduction of
in risk 0,008 incidents per year for platforms is achieved.
The largest contribution of the total
yearly extra costs is delivered by the costs of the extra mlles.
These amount
costs MC 19.3 per year.
In case all wind farms licensed In round
2 are built, the probablilty of a contact wlth a wind turbine
will
amount to 0,0592 per year for rammirig and 0,1363 for drifting additlonal
1f no measures are
Implemented east of the
main route from North Hinder to Texel T5S. In case of the proposed route
structure Is implemented the ramming risk will
amount 0,0037 per year and the drifting risk
0,1155
per year, thus an lmprovenient factor of respectively 16 for rarnming and
1.18 for drifting.
The collision risk of wind turbines
by non-route-bound ships remains the same, because their
behaviour is not affected by the proposed route structure,
The extra lncldents In
case the wInd farms are built are less than the lncldents saved by the
introduction of the proposed route structure.
The three new anchorage
areas near IJmuiden within the proposed route structure are safer than
the existing anchorage area on the north side, because
the lane wlth outgoing traffic from
Ijmuiden to be
has crossed twice. The enchorage area NW will not be used initially but comes Into
use when there is a need to. The
anchoring near IJmuiden will become safer for the proposed route
structure than in the present 5ituation.
Pagina 34 of 44
