Cover report on the (formal) safety assessments for 26 maart 202
t
the Vinca Iess risk In the proposed route structure, because
The wreck of Gorthon will cause case of
because the passing
It will be located outside the routes. However, the reduction In risk is limited
structure is not
distance for the ships salling neer the border of the route In the proposed route
passing the present traffic situatlon. The advantage of the
much more than the dlstance In
sailing plan, because
proposed route structure Is that the wreck can be ignored when preparing the
route.
It Is not longer loceted in the traftic
miles,
The emissions will Increase slightly for the proposed route structure by the extra
3.4 MRA: Munitions Risk Assessment
3.4.1 Methodology
particular
assessment of risks assoclated wlth the ammunition dumping sites recelved
The the
in military
attention and, as such, was carried out by TNO, whlch is an institute that specialises
various risk analyses were carried
munitions. In the risk assessment of ammunition dump sites,
for varlous routing footprints, Incident scenarios and risk rnitigatlng
out, compared and assessed
dump (“present
policies. The routeing footprints entail the current situation around the ammunitiori
(“proposed and the IMO variant
route structure”), the IMO variant 12.12.11 route structure)”
structure”).
2009.11 (“alternative route
3.4.2 MRA Resuits and conciusions
The study demonstrates that the proposed route structure Is Indeed safer than the alternative
that the sites are
route structure and of similar safety as the present route structure, provided
avoided. summary of the TNO report in
approprlately buoyed and adopted as areas to be A
Appendix 3, gives the detalied resuits of the risk analysis.
Risk Assessments
3.5 Overall conciusions of three
FSAJHAZID assessment both assess the overall safety of the proposed
The MARIN QRA and
situatlons. Both QRA and
routeing measures of the IMO variant and compare these to two baseline
safest variant of the three variants
FSA/HAZID come to the conciuslon that the [NO variant Is the
decrease
base conciusion on a cumulation of risk scores whlch show a net
studies. Both studies this
for the [MC variant In comparison to the other two varia nts.
categorically net risk score: according to the QRA, risks decrease for
The QRA breaks down the
ship collisions,
situations, for example strandings, and increase for others, such as ship to
some
according to the FSA/HAZID, risks decrease
The FSA/HAZID locally breaks down the net risk score:
the same) main hotspots of the present route structure. Aithough both studies
Cor remain in the
amount with which
that net risks decrease, the FSA/HAZID seems more optimistic about the
agree
the risk decreases.
disadvantages and are
The methodologies of the two assessments both have their advantages and
basis of expert judgement and
compiemeritary. The FSA/HAZID assessment’s main strength Is its
The and therefore relatively objectlve in the comparison
real-life nuances MARN QRA is numerical
QRA is that it does
levels of risk for the three variants considered. Limitation of the
between the
not take the possible actions of ships’ officers Into account.
variant would be due to the
exampie, the QRA considers the main reduction in risk of the IMO
For
Instaliations that the ‘IMO Variant’
extra clearance of shipping routes from oh, gas and winderiergy
with leaving the traffic routeing measures as they currentiy are, The QRA
provides, compared
concentrated in
predicts a sllght Increase In ship to shlp collislons due to traffic being more
actually
rationalisirig the traffic flows has
fewer routes but it admits that It cannot quantlfy the effect that
wreck no.HY2I.66 of the Ijqeui. To mitigate sny potenti& obstructive effect by this wreck,
Mrin also noted in Liie approaches
the end of
It will lowered removal of its top) wei below the maintalned depth LAT 21.30m before
Rijkswaterstaat has decided that be (by
2016.
Pagina of 44
35
1
