Cover report on the (formel) saety asseasmenta for 26 maart 2O2
1
4.
Risk Control Measures (Step 3)
4.1 Introduction
The design of the new routeing nieasures has been an Iterative process. As set out In chapter 1,
the varlous revlews, which lead to
IMO Variant, version September 2011 has been subjected to
new versions and adjusted deslgns, uitimately Variant, Februari 2012 final
culminating in the IMO
version. All desfgn-steps between the September 2011 and Februari 2012 versions of the IMO
however, to discuss each
Variant design are considered acts of Risk Control. It would lead to far,
single intermediate risk control option considered In the process. In this chapter, the following
kinds of Risk Control Options are therefore discussed:
reduce risk at
1) Risk Control measures that have been Incorporated In the design to
known hotspots In the present routeing system;
optimise
2) Risk Control measures that have been incorporated in the design to
to a
overall risk minimum level;
Risk Control incorporated In the design to mitlgate risks
3) measures that have been
that mlght occur as a resuit of the new design;
Chapter 5 addresses further Risk Control options can be considered in the (near) future, but
that
are not part of the proposed route structure:
4) Residual Risk Control Options during the design of new wind farms;
5) Reslduai Risk Control Options during the Implementatlon of the new routeing
system;
new routeing system.
6) Residual Risk Control Optlons during the operation of the
4.2 Proposed risk control measures for present hotspots
In chapter 2 and 3, a number of no regret measures and hotspots are discussed that should be
Incorporated new foilowing risk control
in a routeing design. This leads to proposal of the
measures:
separates Inbound
• To establlsh a traft9c routeing systern in the approaches to IJmuIden that
from outbound traffic lanes and restrlcts crossing of these lanes by north and south
the
separated
going vessels within two proposed precautlonary areas In this way, traffic Is
from any future deveiopments of renewabie energy in this area.
In
To move the western boundary of the IJmuiden deep-water approach area westwards
to vessels adjusting their heading
order provide more maneuverlng space for deep draft
and speed when embarking or disembarking a pilot by helicopter.
to IJmuiden
• To provide an emergency turning area In the deep-water channel ieadlng
about 5 miies off entrance for Inbound deep draft vessels to turn around and
the port
return to deeper water 1f the port entrance is suddenly obstructed
southwestern end of the Texel’s extended lane, to establish a second south
• At the TSS 0ff
area Maas
bound branch lane aiigned with the southbound routeing in the precautlonary
hot spot at the Horizon
Junction to direct traffic for Schouwenbank away from the current
platform and reduce the risk of coliision at this Location.
order to avoid
• To silghtly re-ailgn the northeast bound iane of TSS North Hinder North In
vessels passing
excessively close to the Horizon platform
risk levels in the IMO
4.3 Proposed risk control measures for optimization of
Variant
move traffic separation scheme miles to the west In order to create
• To the Maas North 4.5
more anchoring space in the approaches to IJmuiden and to avoid ships anchoring in the
flows from
traffic the TSS Maas North to the TSS 0ff Texel.
Paçlna 370f 44
