Cover report on the (formal) sefety assessments for 26 masrt 2012
1
6. Cost Benefit Analysis (Step 4)
Much of the Risk Control Optlons (RCOs) listed above will have lIttie on no additional cost
Impllcation but their irnproved utilisation and implementatlon will certainiy Impact on the safety
considered in
aspect of navigation throughout the selected Variant. The RCOs which need to be
more depth will be analysed below,
6.1. Emergency Towing Vessels
(ETVs)
6.1.1 Introduction
The function of ETV capacity is to prevent that any maritime incident, due to drifting, should
escalate into one of catastrophic consequences for human, economlc, financial or environmental
values. response to an situatlon and negate the
Early incident Is more likely to contaln the
historically large associated clean up and compensatlon costs. For the cost-benefit analysls, the
central question is whether one ETV remains sufficient, whether less ETV capacity mlght suftlce or
recommendable.
whether the new routeing measures would render additlonal ETV capacity
6.1.2 Dutch developments
The Netherlands curreritly operate in Den Helder. In 2010 the levoli
one ETV, which is moored
Black has continued the ETV task of “De Waker”. As soon as a report of a drifter is received by the
Netherlands Coastguard and assistance is requlred, the ETV is alarmed and directed to the drifter.
The probabillty a failure during weather conditlons and also the drifting
to get is hlgher severe
speed will be larger. For this reason, the ETV of the Coastguard Is positioned at sea during wind
conditions from 5 Beaufort, resulting in lower response times.
The Dutch Ministry of Transport Environment currently reviewlng the cost-benefit of the
and the is
distribution
ETV. A 2006 Marln study whlch compared varlous options for ETV capacity and spatial
Den Helder. Rijkswaterstaat Is
of the ETV, resulted in the deployment of 1 ETV with Its base in
currently commlssionlng a new study to Marin with the alm of investigating alternative
indications that
arrangements using multi-purpose vessels, possibly in multiple locations. There are
equally reliable, more
such arrangements may be beneficlal In many ways as this may be an
fiexible and more cost-effective means of providing Emergency Towing services,
for the new
The decision making process about ETV capacity is stlll ongolng. Consideratlons
proposed routeing system shali, upon adoption by IMO, be integrally taken along In this
the
consideratlon. As the proposed routelng system is assessed to be overall safer than current
proposed routeing measures In the
routeing system, It is considered appropriate to Inciude the
above discussion, rather than having a separate discussion on ETV capacity in this FSA.
Vessel
6.2 Commercial Additional Cost Analysis
Both the FSA/HAZID study and the QRA conciude that the proposed routeing measures will lead to
that
additional dlstances for commercial traffic and associated costs. The FSA/HAZID notes
additional distances Incurred small when considered indivldually In the
by commercial traffic are
context of foreign going vessels that transit the routes lnfrequently.
this corisidering all vessels that enter the ports of
Even so, figure escalates to a large amount when
Rotterdam and Ijmuiden on an annual basis. As calculated in the QRA, the total costs amount to
M€19,3 per year.
The additional mileage, and therefore costs, is more readily feit by those Indivldual vessels which
vesseis
frequent the ports on a daily basis and ciassed as regular runners, that is, ferries, feeder
slmiiar.
and
Pagina 4 of 44
