ONGERUBRICEERD TNO report TNO-DV 2012 C485 3181
1 1
Dumping of munition was mainly performed Tanks (LCTs)
using Landing Craft
average
with an bad of about 220 ton. Dumping started after the vessel had
anchored and stabilized in the current, consequently roughly 150
resulting in
of dumped
piles munition at IJmuiden and 100 piles at Hook of Holland; since
the munition articles are accordingly in close proximity within
one pile,
sympathetic
detonation within one pile (not between piles) may occur.
A the
study of areas shows that the munition dump sites off Ijmuiden and Hook of
Holland are situated some 30 to 40 kilometres off shore. The water depth at the
munition dump site Ijmuiden
is between 21 to 23 m, and at Hook of Holland 19 to
26 m. The bottom morphology comprises soft seabeds, sand with a wave
waves
Iength few hundred
of a meters and a typical height of several meters, with smaller
waves in between. Sonar plots demonstrate that only a tiny fraction of the munition
covered by
is not sand. Based on local sand wave heights, the munition lies at a
depth of at east 23 and 25 m at the dump sites of Ijmuiden of Holland
and Hook
respectively. The distance between the keel of the vessel and the munition is about
10 meters when the vessel is situated above the munition. For
the scenarios bottom
trawling
and dragging of anchor, the distance between the keel and the munition
increases to about 100 m.
Risk assessment methodology
The is quantified qualitatively
risk by multiplying likellhood and effect per scenario.
The overall likelihood of an underwater detonation likelihood of
is composed of the
of
exposure shipping related incidents to the munition dump area, the Iikelihood of
interaction with munition and the likelihood
of a munition reaction:
• The exposure is based on probability calculations of shipping incidents at or
near the dumping areas by the Marine Research
lnstitute (MARIN);
• The Iikelihood of interaction with munition is assessed:
— for direct impact by relating the areal density of munition
the piles with the
dimensions of the ship, anchor, trawling gear or dropped cargo;
— for indirect contact via vibration or turbulence on the basis of the distance
between ship/propeller and seabed and propeller characteristics;
• The likelihood of munition reaction
is assessed:
munition deformation
— for scenarios by comparing these against known
initiation thresholds for impulse unit area;
per unit area and energy per
— for initiation of fuze systems in view of safety regulations for transport and
hand ling at the time of dumping.
The effects of an underwater explosion are quantitatively based on
assessed the
size of the explosion .and its distance to the vessel, the type of ship and type of
cargo. The effects per scenario are determined based
on a maximum credible
threat
in the order of 10,000 kg TNT. This threat is conservatively estimated by
assuming that two-thirds of a single munition pile sympathetically detonates
in high
order in case one munition item is initiated.
All risks assessments are categorized in line with the Fine & Kinney method using
qualitative terms. The above-water effects blast,
of the explosion such as air
fragmentation and tidal wave, are negligible compared to the underwater effects of
the explosion.
ONGERUBRICEERD
