ONGERUBRICEERD TNO report TNO-DV 2012 C485 9/81
1 1
Introduction
Sea is intensively
The North used by ships harbouring in major ports of the United
Kingdom, Denmark, Netherlands and Belgium. These ships have to follow specific
traffic
lanes to avoid collisions. As the remaining surface area of the North Sea is
increasingly taken up by oil and gas platforms and lately by wind miii parks, the
shipping routes on Dutch
the North Sea are congesting. For this reason, the
Ministry of lnfrastructure and Environment has advanced pians for adjustment of the
current traffic lanes for
shipping on the North Sea. The alternative route structures
interfere with the munition dump sites off IJmuiden and Hook of Holland.
Accordingly, the Dutch Ministry
of infrastructure and the Environment
(Rijkswaterstaat) has requested TNO to evaluate the risks of ship traffic relative to
sites based on the
the dump following incident scenarios potentially occurring at the
dump sites [Berlo, 2011]:
sinks;
• ship
• ship anchors;
•
drifter drags anchor;
• fishing boat drags bottom trawling gear;
• ship loses
container or other deck cargo;
• vibration of ship movement disturbs seabed;
turbulence due
• water to propeller wash disturbs seabed;
• ship strikes seabed with keel or propeller.
The risk assessment is performed for:
present route
• The structure;
• The proposed route structure in which the northbound Traffic
lane of the
Separation
Scheme (TSS) is moved eastwards, so that the dumping areas will
be located in the separation zone;
• The alternative route structure with the dumping areas near Rotterdam located
in the northbound lane of the TSS.
The risk analysis needs to incorporate the type of ship and cargo as the traffic lanes
used by
are to be fishing ships, small to largest category container ships and ships
carrying environmentally unfriendly and dangerous cargo. The latter two types are
au
made up by tankers and ships transporting chemicals and explosive substances
like gasoline and LPG. The Ministry of lnfrastructure and the Environment has
risk
limited the assessment to ships with a maximum draught of 15 m, which relates
to the water depths in the area.
The risk is quantified qualitatively by multiplying likelihood and effect per scenario.
The likelihood is composed of exposure (or probability of occurrence), likelihood of
interaction with munition and likelihood of detonation:
• the exposure
is based on probability calculations of possibie shipping incidents
at or near the dumping areas by the Marine Research Institute (MARIN);
likelihood
• the of interaction with munition is assessed by TNO based on the
situation at the dump sites (bottom morphology, amount of dumped munition
munition density);
and
• the likelihood of detonation is based on munition deformation scenarios that are
compared against
known initiation thresholds for impulse per unit area and
energy per unit area (also referred to as energy fluence).
ONGERUBRICEERD
