ONGERUBRICEERD TNO report TNO-DV 2012 C485 11/81
1 1
2 Historical
information on munition dumping
In order to appropriately evaluate traffic across or
the risks associated with ship
near the munition dump sites, the amount of munition, type of munition and
dumping
methods are of interest. For this reason TNO requested the NIMH and
EODD to search their archives for these key pieces of information. In addition, TNO
searched the archives addressed a
of the National Archive in The Hague and
variety of other sources such as museums and the Nederlands Instituut voor
Oorlogs Documentatie (NIOD). This chapter describes the results of these surveys.
The NIMH archive search results (in Dutch) are integrally reproduced in Appendix
A. The results from the survey of the National Archive are reproduced in Appendix
B. Ship’s journals describing the dumping efforts are reproduced in Appendix C. In
Appendix D the records of the Van Waning collection presented, which provide
are
details on transportation and dumping procedures, recommended safety measures
and types of munition overview addressed sources of
eligible for dumping. An of the
information and the response is provided in Appendix E.
2.1 Dumping activities
After the Second World War (WWII) an approximate 120,000 tons of munition were
left behind on Dutch soil [Woensel, 2004]. Since dumping of munition in the North
Sea was considered be solution activities started
to a suitable at the time, dumping
just after the war and continued until 1967. The dumping activities can be separated
into two phases; forces and was
at first, dumping was the responsibility of the allied
performed under British command by the Allied Enemy Munition Depot Control Unit
(EADCU) in cooperation Staff including the
with the Naval Disarmament Control
Royal Netherlands Navy. This phase lasted until 1 October 1945. After that,
dumping was performed by the Opruimings en BergingsDienst (OBD) under Dutch
authority: the Dutch Ministry of the Navy was responsible for clearing the coastal
areas and
the Ministry of War was responsible for inland clearance.
A master plan of the munition dump in the North Sea likely never existed as no
reference to it was found in any of the historical records.
2.1.1 Dumping under British command
The general dumping policy was established by the Allied Naval Commander-in
Chief, Expeditionary were German
Force. Types of munition eligible for dumping
naval, military and air force munition of types not suitable for use in demolitions
programmes, A dumping location
or not conveniently destructible by other means.
0ff Hook of Holland was assigned (52° 13’ NL, 3° 49’ EL) and granted by the British
Admiralty after consultation with the Dutch Ministry of Food, Agriculture and
Fisheries. In anticipation of the use of this dump site, an unknown quantity of
munition Hurds Deep
collected from Dutch soil was dumped in British waters at in
the English Channel. Dumping at Hook of Holland started during September 1945.
The munition described as all German Army consisting of various calibres fixed
munition” probably originated from the large munition dump on land near Hook of
Holland that was under supervision of the 304 Enemy Munition Depot Control Unit.
Dumping was performed using three coasters under supervision of the Dutch Royal
Navy.
ONGERUBRICEERD
