ONGERUBRICEERD TNO report TNO-DV
2012 C485 12 / 81
1 1
Loading of the vessels
with munition was performed by German prisoners of war
under British command and facilitated by loading cranes. It
is anticipated that the
coasters carried loading
cranes themselves (corroborated by [Ruis, 2011]).
Dumping at Hook of Holland was also performed using amphibious
assault ships or
Landing Craft Tanks (LCTs)
that were loaded with munitions in Hook of Holland and
Vlissingen. Between September 1945 and June 1946 approximately
10,000 tons of
munitions were dumped at the site
off Hook of Holland.
Figure 1 Loading of LCT with munition for dumping in the North Sea [Foundation
Historical
Archive EDDI.
2.1.2 Dumping under Dutch
authority (1946-1947)
As the clearing and dumping
progress was slow, it was decided on February 9 1946
that
responsibility for clearing of the remaining 80,000 to 100,000 tons of
mainly
German munition was shifted to
the Ministers of Navy and War. To mitigate the risk
for
the population it was decided to upgrade the work to the highest
rate possible.
Regulations dictated dump all munition
to that was safe for transport and not
suitable
for reuse. The remaining munition was destructed, preferably in
situ, ie.
blown in place. Before transport to
the designated harbours, munition was first
collected
at munition depots like Noordertocht. At these locations munitions that
could be (partially) were
reused set apart for further treatment at the Artillerie
Inrichtingen
at Zaandam and the Explosives Factory in Muiden. Transportation
was
performed under authority of the Dutch
land forces. Loading of the LCTs, and at
Zierikzee also Landing Craft Mechanized ships (LCM5, a smaller version
of the
LCT), transportation at
sea and dumping was performed under authority of the
Dutch
Navy. The archives present evidence that munition from the coastal defence
as part of the German Atlantikwali
was also dumped in the same manner. Figure 1
shows
that the LCTs did not carry loading cranes and that loading
of munition was
consequently performed hand. For
by loading and dumping, use was made of a
conveyer
belt as shown in Figure 1. [Ruis, 2011] reported that dumping
of lighter
munitions started when leaving the river mouth
of the Nieuwe Waterweg and that
floating munition
was fired upon using the LCT’s machine gun until the munition
exploded or sank.
ONGERUBRICEERD
