ONGERUBRICEERD
TNO report TNO-DV 2012 C485
14/81
1 1
According to [Woensel, 2004] an estimated total of 60,000
tons munition was
dumped; roughly 47,000 were
tons dumped on two locations in the North Sea, 30 to
40 kilometres away from the coastline 0ff Hook of Holland and
IJmuiden and
roughly 13,000 tons were dumped
in the Oosterschelde. TNO will assume a
conservative amount of 30,000 and 20,000 tons dumped
of munition at IJmuiden
and Hook of Holland respectively.
2.3 Types
of dumped munition
The records directly related to the dumping activities focus general
on the
procedures and amount of
the total munition. These records provide limited
information on the specific types of munitions that were dumped. records
The
describing munition activities
clearing reveal that land mines were blown in place
and that sea mines were defused and transported to the Explosives
Factory in
Muiden where the explosive
content was extracted for reuse.
The aircraft bombs that were dropped by German of Allied
aircraft on Dutch soil
without exploding were too
dangerous to be handled as these bombs could
potentially be activated when disturbed. These types of UnExploded
Ordnance
(UXO) were typically
blown in place or nearby the site of detection. Furthermore, it
seems unlikely that large quantities of heavy aircraft
bombs were left behind at the
military airfields as these were primarily
used for fighter aircraft. It is thus unlikely
that aircraft bombs were dumped at sea in large numbers.
From the available records it appears that the greater part
of the dumped munition
came from dump sites
on land or field storages from the Allied and German land
and naval forces such as shown in Figure 3. This munition is
in the safe position
and therefore safe to
be transported. These sites and storages are thought to
typically contain munitions such as:
• Hand grenades;
• Demolition charges;
• Small calibre, machine
e.g. 0.5” gun rounds;
• Medium calibre, e.g. 20 —40 mm anti-aircraft rounds;
• Large calibre, e.g. mortars,
81 mm 105 mm, 155 mm and 8” field artillery shells.
Figure 3 Field storage [Woensel, 2004].
ONGERUBRICEERD
