ONGERUBRICEERD TNO
report TNO-DV 2012 C485 18 / 81
1
1
Figure
7 On arrival at the ammunition dumping ground off Cairnryan, members of the Royal
Army Ordnance Corps (RAOC) place shells on gravity rollers that take the ammunition
over the side of the ship and into the sea [Imperial War Museum].
The
available records regarding the dump in the North Sea show that munition was
dumped in its packaging present. whether
if It is not known single or multiple boxes
where
thrown overboard (in nets or on pallets). Munition transport units in that
period were sized for manual with
loading and unloading, so a maximum gross
mass of approximately 30 to 60 kg per box. In modern munition, the largest
amounts of high explosive per box
are found in 120 mm mortar shelis, which are
packaged
with 2 rounds per box, with a gross mass of approximately 50 kg and a
High Explosive (HE) mass of 7.8 kg.
Boxes with demolition charges may contain a
larger amount
of HE per box but since confinement of the explosive is a conditiori
for a detonation impact,
under the risk posed by such charges is thought to be less
than posed by steel cased munition (as discussed in section 5.3.2). The largest
artillery shelis were accordingly considered
to pose the greatest single munition
item threat as they contain the highest amourit of explosive (e.g. the 24 cm shell
from coastal batteries
has a filling of approximately 12 kg TNT).
The largest munition types were
retrieved from the German coastal Atlantikwail
defence at Rozenburg with 28 cm guns (transferred from the German battieship
Gneisenau) when these fortifications
were demilitarized by the Royal Dutch Navy.
These
guns fired very heavy shells of approximately 300 kg that consisted for
a
large part of steel to penetrate heavy
armours and only a relatively small amount of
explosive
(15 - 18 kg). Although it is at least questionable whether such heavy
shelis could be overboard,
thrown they may have been simply rolled off the ship as
shown in Figure 5. This munition type accordingly presents the largest single
item
threat. However, number
the of dumped naval artillery sheils is anticipated to be
small compared to the number of dumped field artillery shells. From this perspective
the 8” artillery shell (203
mm calibre) with a weight of about 110 kg and containing
approximately
12 kg TNT [Kroon, E., et al., 2009] is considered as the largest single
item threat under the assumption performed
that dumping was by hand.
Dumping was also performed with Viking,
three coasters called Paloma and
Halstadt
or Haimstad (see the ship inventory described in the Letter to Dutch Naval
Commander, date 3 December 1945 is
in Appendix B). It anticipated that these
coasters
had deck cranes.
ONGERUBRICEERD
