ONGERUBRICEERD TNO report TNO-DV 2012 C485 26181
1 1
4 Description of incident scenarios
The following incident scenarios potentially occurring at the dump sites are
considered for the risk analysis [Berlo, 2011]:
• ship sinks;
• ship anchors;
• drifter drags anchor;
• fishing baat drags anchor / bottom trawling gear;
• ship loses container deck cargo
or other
• vibration of ship movement disturbs seabed;
• water turbulence due to propeller wash disturbs seabed;
• ship strikes seabed with keel or propeller.
A wide variety of vessel types are to be included for the analysis, ranging from small
fishing vessels to oil tankers, small to largest category container ships, ships
transporting containers, chemicals and LPG [Berlo, 2011]. These ships are
categorized in ships carrying cargo and explosive cargo and normal (i.e.
polluting
non polluting and non explosive) cargo when relevant for the incident scenario.
Apart from a sinking ship and a ship striking the seabed with its keel or propeller,
between the keel of the vessel and the
these scenarios relate to the distance
munition article. This distance depends on the water depth, height of the sand
waves and draught of the vessel. These subjects are described in the next sections.
and draught
4.1 Water depth, height of sand waves
The water depth at the munition dump site IJmuiden is 21 m or more and is
low water level (LLWL) to the crest of the
measured by the distance from the lowest
sand waves on the seabed. The munition will lie deeper, in the troughs of the 2 m
high sand waves, at a depth of at least 23m (confirmed by Ministry of Infrastructure
and the Environment) [Berlo, 9 November 2011]. Atthe dump site Hook of Holland
waves are about 6 m high. The
the water depth is 19 m or more and the sand
munition accordingly lies at approximately 25m depth or deeper [Angeren,
paragraph 2, 2011]. Accordingly, the munition at Ijmuiden is situated less deep
than for Hook of Holland.
The tides at the dump sites have an amplitude of 0.5 to 1 m (difference between
lowest 10w water level to Mean Sea Level (MSL)). The average tide will be
approximately 0.5 m, so the average depth is increased by 0.5 m. In storms, the
waves approximately 4 m, but vessels with the
largest can have an amplitude of
largest draught are not much influenced by this surge. Figure 16 illustrates the
distances between sea bed, sand wave height, water depth and draught.
considered is 15 m as specified by the
The maximum draught of vessels to be
Ministry of lnfrastructure and the Environment [Berlo, 2011]. 1f the vessel crosses
the munition dump site during lowest low water level, the average tide is
between the
disregarded and the draught is assumed to be maximal, the distance
keel of the vessel and the munition is at least 8m for Ijmuiden and lOm for Hook
of Holland.
ONGERUBRICEERD
