.
ONGERUBRICEERD TNO report TNO-DV 2012 C485 33? 81
1
Likelihood
5.2 of interaction
The likelihood of interaction with munition is based on the situation the dump
at
sites made up by the amount
of dumped munition versus dumping area, dispersion
of munition, and bottom morphology. Two kinds of interactions with munitions
are
anticipated; a direct mechanical
contact with the munition; and an indirect
mechanical contact through the propagation of vibration waves from the ship to the
munition or by water turbulence
due to propeller wash. The likelihood of a direct
mechanical contact is related to the areal density of munitions munition dump
at the
sites on the one hand and the dimensions
of the ship, ship items or cargo on the
other hand. The likelihood of indirect mechanical contact distance
varies with
between ship/propeller and
seabed and ship/propeller characteristics.
5.2.1 Density of munitions in the dump sites
This paragraph provides an estimate of the density of munition dump sites off
in the
IJmuiden and Hook of
Holland.
5.2.1.1 Average munition density for dispersed
articles
It is estimated that 30,000 ton of munition was dumped in the dump site off
IJmuiden and 20,000 ton
in the site off Hook of Holland.
10.106
The area of the dump site of IJmuiden is approximately while the area of
,m2
3.106
the dump site off Hook of Holland
is m2, sothe density atthe site off Hook of
Holland is the largest at 6.7 kglm2
It is unclear whether the
amount of munition is net explosive mass, mass of the
articles or gross mass including packaging. The latter and is
is the most likely
adopted here. In [Ham
and Duvalois, 1999] on the Oosterschelde the values also
refer to gross mass including packaging.
The historic information
seems to indicate that small arms munition, land mines, sea
mines, bombs and large calibre shells were not dumped, great quantity.
or not in
The net explosive
mass can be estimated from ratios for the net/gross mass from
modern munition [Wees, 2007]. This is based on a database from 2005 inventory
a
of the RNLA munition.
The ratio gross mass (including packaging) / net explosive
mass (HE, propellant or pyrotechnics) is 6.04, for in the
all types of munition
inventory of the Dutch land forces
in 2005. When only the munition types that were
dumped are considered, the ratio is 9.1.
Of the explosive,
only the high explosive can detonate. The ratio of total explosive
substance / high explosive in the inventory of the Dutch 1 .5. The
land forces is
average explosive
mass in HE-filled articles is 0.748 kg. Bombs, missiles and other
modern articles that were not present in the dumped munition after second
the
World War were excluded
from the 2005 RNLA inventory in the calculation of the
ratio and average.
Of the high explosive-filled
articles, only the larger cased articles can conceivably
be set off by a blunt impact or similar stimulus. The ratio of explosive mass in HE
filled munition articles
to larger cased munition filled with HE is 1.81. The average
explosive mass in larger cased HE-filled articles, from to the largest
40 mm calibre
shells, 3.106 kg as derived
is from the same 2005 RNLA munition inventory.
From the above data,
the net explosive quantity (NEQ), the NEQ of the high
explosive filled articles and the NEQ of the larger cased HE-filled articles in the
dump can
sites be calculated.
ONGERUBRICEERD
