22
.
ONGERUBRICEERD TNO report
TNO-DV 2012 C485 36/81
1 1
Assuming that these
amounts are dumped in 150 respectively 100 munition piles,
each covering a surface of 500 m2, the areal density of munition dump sites
at the
1.7102
equals 810 (IJmuiden)
or /m2m2 (Hook of Holland).
In the direct mechanical
contact scenarios a quantitative assessment of the
likelihood of the interaction with munition is made.
Ship sinks
A ship with typical Iength
and width of 150 X 30 m has a large surface area
compared to the 500 m2 area of a single munition pile. The probability of interaction
is well approximated values
(for < 1) by the ships surface area multiplied with the
number of munition piles divided by the total area of The probability
the dump site.
of the ship to interact with a munition
pile is 0.07 to 0.15. The likelihood of
interaction is considered likely.
Ship
strikes seabed with keel orpropeller
The surface area
of the ship is assumed to be representative for this incident
scenario, and the probability of interaction with munition is equal to the probability
in
the sinking ship scenario.
The likelihood when a ship strikes the seabed with keel or
propeller is considered likely.
anchors
Ship
The surface area of
an anchor is small compared to the area of a single munition
pile, and the probability of interaction equals the areal munition at the
density of
The likelihood
dump sites. of an anchor to interact with munition is considered quite
possible.
Ship
loses container
A container is
expected to interfere only with the top layer of the seabed. The areal
density of munitions at the seabed is smaller than the areal density of the munition
piles. An indication of the
smaller areal density of munitions at the dump site is dear
from sonar surveys [Ham et al., 2001], [Van Angeren, 2011]. Van Angeren
12.9.106
performed a sonar survey
atthe Hook of Holland dump site. In the 2m
survey 55 sonar contacts were made with an average size of all contacts of
sonar
20 The areal density
m2. of sonar contacts is 910 /mm As the container surface
(20*
area 8 ft2 = 14.4 m2) is smaller than the average size, the
sonar contact
of the container
probability to interactwith munitions equals g•i-. The likelihood of
a lost container to interact with munition is considered conceivable very unlikely.
but
Ship
loses deck cargo
For lost deck
cargo that only interferes with the top layer of the seabed, and with a
similar surface area as a container, the probability to interact munitions is also
with
910-. The likelihood of
a lost deck cargo to interact with munition is considered
conceivable but very unlikely.
boat
Fishing drags bottom trawling gear
The penetration depth
of beam trawl depends on weight, towing speed and type of
substrate and will be 1 to 8 cm [Paschen et al., 2000]. For trawling munition needs
a
to be exposed at the surface
of the seabed for any interference to occur. The typical
area for a fishing boat crossing the munition dump is far larger munition
than
contact areas at the seabed
surface.
ONGERUBRICEERD
