ONGERUBRICEERD TNO report TNO-DV 2012 C485 39/81
1 1
5.3 Likelihood of munition reaction
In this paragraph first the likelihood of a sympathetic detonation
is treated. It is
important
to know whether or not one can rule out the possibility of a propagation of
reaction throughout (part of) the based on
munition dump. This analysis is the
assumption of
a full detonation of a representative amount of explosives that is
being dumped, the propagation of the shockwave through the water and the shock
sensitivity of munitions at the dump site.
The likelihood of ignition and consequential deflagration or
munition reaction (burn,
detonation) is discussed
both for a direct mechanical contact, for example due to a
sinking ship or a dropped anchor, and an indirect through the
mechanical contact
propagation of vibration waves to sensitive components like fuzes.
5.3.1 Sympathetic detonation
The eventual detonation of a single munition article will cause wave
a shock into the
surrounding
water and sea bed. 1f that shock wave in the water hits nearby
munitions that are also filled with sufficient
HE and if the shock strength is of
magnitude, then
the nearby munition(s) will detonate and new shock waves are
generated. This phenomenon is called sympathetic important to
detonation. It is
know whether or not a sympathetic detonation of several munitions may occur, as a
sympathetic detonation directly enlarges environment
the consequences to the and
ships.
surface
In the discussion below the detonating single
munition is called the donor munition
and the nearby munition is called the acceptor munition. The sympathetic
detonation of the acceptor munition is governed by the
following parameters:
1. Amount of high explosive in donor munition that reacts in detonation mode;
2. TNT equivalence of the high explosive composition donor
in munition;
3. Distance between donor and acceptor munition;
4. Shock sensitivity of
the acceptor munition.
The strength of the shock wave in water single item is
due to the detonation of a
calculated in paragraph 5.3.1.1. The distance between munitions or aerial density is
calculated in paragraph 5.2.1. A
review of the shock sensitivity of relevant high
explosives is given in paragraph 5.3.1.2. The likelihood of sympathetic detonation is
assessed in paragraph 5.3.1.3.
Note that sympathetic detonation can occur within one dumped package or LCT
munition pile as the munition items are in close proximity
when grouped. However,
taking into account the areal density of the larger calibre munitions and munition
packages dumped at the North Sea, conciuded
it is that one can safely neglect the
sympathetic
detonation between individually dumped munitions, individually
dumped munition packages, LCTs.
or between individual munition piles from
5.3. 1.1 Shock wave propagation in water due to a point detonation
It is assumed that the total amount of high explosive in a munition detonates. The
energy release represents the worst
case and is similar to the designed functioning
mode of the item. The larger calibre munitions are typically filled with TNT, which
represents the most commonly used type of
explosive during WWII, and no
correction for TNT equivalence is necessary. Note that sea mines and torpedoes
are excluded from this study. The latter munitions contain
high explosive
compositions that are optimized regarding their effect on surface ships.
ONGERUBRICEERD
