ONGERUBRICEERD TNO
report TNO-DV 2012 C485 45181
1
Three different
types of mechanical deformation are discussed in paragraphs
53.2.1 through 5.3.2.3, namely: 1) the uniform
mechanical loading of the projected
area of a
munition, 2) the non-uniform mechanical loading, and 3) the intrusion of
an object into a munition, see paragraph
5.3.2.3. Figure 22 summarizes
schematically these different types of mechanical deformation.
For the uniform mechanical loading threshold impulse
values of and energy per unit
area are given
for initiation of munitions. The values can be compared directly to
the
impulse and energy delivered by
ship, container, anchor, trawling beam, etc. in
accident
scenarios. However, for the non-uniform loading or the intrusion
of objects
into a munition, no general initiation criteria
of munitions can be given. These
deformation
modes are considered a worse threat than uniform mechanical
loading.
Some experimental data on spigot intrusion
into munitions and concrete debris
impact and are
provided for comparison purposes. The assessment of deformation
in mechanical contact scenarios is given
in paragraph 5.3.2.4.
r
1
Figure 22 Deformation of a munition in a schematic representation:
uniform loading of complete
munition (top left), intrusion of an object
into the munition (bottom right) and the non-
uniform loading of a munition
as an intermediate type of deformation (middie).
5.3.2.1 The
uniform mechanicalloading of the projected area of a munition
In [Bouma
et al., 2003] an overview is given of the developments of the High
Perfomance Magazine in the USA and the
associated categorization of munitions
into Sensitivity
Groups. In the beginning of the nineties thresholds for pressure
in
the explosive and deformation of the munition
have been formulated [Malvar, 1996].
The deformation
threshold in Table 12 is related to the ratio of change in diameter
D and original munition diameter D,
and is a measure of the flatness achieved
during
the crushing process. The pressure threshold is determined in the
PUST
underwater shock test and is the pressure ignition,
at which not detonation, is
observed.
Also an overview of expected reactions of thick and thin case munitions
is given in Table 12 for combinations
of applied deformation and pressure.
ONGERUBRICEERD
