18
Report No. 25648-1-MSCN-rev.2
A
-:
4 APPROACH
same foliowed in [1]. In [1], six variants of a route structure
The approach has been as
Sea shipping. Within
were dealt with that cleared different areas of the Dutch North of
up the
each of the six variants, sub-variants were considered with respect to fihling
cleared sea space with wind turbines.
was composed in close
Now, a new design for a route structure is proposed that
cooperation with all stakeholders by taking into account lessons learnt from the previous
designs. It is a new traffic separation scheme in the approach of IJmuiden and
based on
way large is created between the main traffic
it is composed in such a that a distarice
further
flows and the licensed wind farms of round two. This new route structure will be
indicated in this report with the “proposed route structure°. The impact of this proposed
route structure on shipping and safety will quantified in the same way as in [1]. This
be
variants of
enables a comparison of the impacts of the proposed route structure and the
to the
[1], which makes it easier to qualify the proposed route structure with respect
others.
been
The impacts for shipping have been quantified with the SAMSON model that has
developed, extended, validated and improved continuously during the last 25 years in
for Dutch Maritime Safety Authority, European projects and
studies performed the
A.
commercial projects. A brief description of the model is given in Appendix
is possible when the basic assumptions are equal. Therefore the base
Comparison only
port A to port B has been
for the traffic flows, being the shipping movements from each
movements to and from the
kept the same as in [1]. These movements also inciude
anchorage areas of Rotterdam, but not to other anchorage areas, because traffic to and
from other areas was not affected. However, for the proposed route structure,
anchor
and therefore the anchorage
the routes in the vicinity of IJmuiden charige considerabiy
reason, the
areas in the approach of IJmuiden need to be included in the QRA. For this
impact of the proposed route structure has been performed in two parts.
Firstly, the new anchorage areas of Ijmuiden
movements to and from the existing and
database is unchanged, which
are not inciuded, thus in this case the base of the traffic
In
makes it possible to compare the results with the results of the six variants of [1]. the
it is assumed that the number of ships at anchor will be spread
first calculations average
areas that the average number of ships per
over the four anchorage in such a way
square miie (the traffic density) is the same for the four anchorage areas.
Thereafter, the impacts of the movements to and from the anchorage areas of
Ijmuiden quantified separately for each anchorage area. This is necessary, because
are
area of IJmuiden is
in case of the proposed route structure, the existing anchorage
three new
decreased in size and this loss of space is more than compensated by
anchorage areas.
shortly, the wind farrn Q1O
Because it is expected that wind farm Q1O will be built
together with the existing wind farms OWEZ and Princess Amalia are included in the
case (Dr traffic database) that describes the present state for the area of interest.
