Report No. 25648-1-MSCN-rev.2 20
A
5 IN PUT FOR THE CALCULATIONS
5.1 The traffic databases
The most important element for a risk assessment is the traffic database. The traffic
database describes where shipping sails and with which intensity. The traffic database is
composed by determining the routes over sea for all ships A port 8 and
from port to
summarizing
all ship movements on the routes. The shortest route will be followed,
taking into account the regulations, traffic separation schemes, the water depths and the
obstructions at sea such as offshore platforms and wind farms. Each traffic database is
constructed from the same set of movements from A to 8, but each with a different set
of routeing schemes and obstructions.
For this study two new traffic databases have been developed, namely:
• one for the existing route structure and existing obstructions, inciuding the wind
farms OWEZ, Amalia, and near-future wind This traffic
Princess the farm Q10.
database is iridicated as “base with Ql0’.
• one for the proposed route structure with the wind farms OWEZ, Princess
Amalia and Q10. This traffic database is indicated as the ‘proposed route
structure”.
The proposed route used for quantitative for each wind
structure is the risk assessment
farm licensed in round 2.
Further two traffic databases of [1] have been used for a better understanding of what
has been delivered.
changed in the different steps and which benefits it has
Finally the four traffic databases used in the QRA are presented in Figure 5-1 to Figure
5-4. All are based on the same set of shipping movements of 2008.
Figure 5-1 shows the “base”, being the traffic flows for the traffic separation schemes in
2011 with the existing wind farms OWEZ and Princess Amalia (taken from [1]).
Figure 5-2 shows the traffic flow of variant 1, taken from [1], for which the traffic is routed
around the wind farms that are licensed in round 2. Only in the far west area a larger
area is cleared of shipping than necessary for the wind farms Tromp, Den Helder and
Brown Ridge East. This case is used to illustrate the effect of the proposed route
structure on the collision risk of these round 2 wind farms. This case is referred to as
“Routeing present situation with 11 wind farms in place”.
Figure 5-3 shows the traffic database for the case that wind farm 010 is added to the
base case. This case is referred to as ‘Routeing present situation with 3 wind farms in
place”.
Figure structure. The
5-4 shows the traffic database for the proposed route proposed
route structure consists of a network of routes, of which the borders are plotted with
black lines in Figure 5-4. The objective is that ships will follow these routes, which
means that they will pass wind farm areas licensed in the round 2 on a distance of at
least two nautical miles. This will reduce the collision risk with a wind turbine. On the
other hand this way of routeing will result in a higher concentration of shipping which
may result in a higher probability of collision. Only the route from IJmuiden to the deep
water routes (chemical eastern coast of UK and
and oil tankers) and to the north the
vice versa will cross the black-defined areas. This case is referred to as ‘Routeing
proposal with 11 wind farms in place”
