26
Report No. 25648-1-MSCN-rev.2
salvage, repairing, delay, loss
The collision costs contain the costs of deaths, pollution,
of income, collected within several projects and publications from P&O clubs.
inciuded completely. Only the
The costs of contacts with offshore platforms are not
could not
damages to the ship are included. The costs of damages to offshore platforms
be quantified because no data is available for this type of consequences.
costs are taken into
The extra emissions are quantified. The corresponding societal
accourit in the costs benefits effectiveness analysis.
collision turbines included in Table 6-2, but presented
The risk with the wind is not
separately in Chapter 6.2.
The route structures and shipping can be evaluated
impact of the different on safety
6-3. The first column contains
better by presenting the differences, as is done in Table
columns contain
the absolute values of the impacts per year for the base. The next three
the
the values the impacts for the other three traffic databases minus the values for
of
base case.
will be
When looking at the impacts on safety, Table 6-3 shows that 0,153 more ships
involved in per year for the proposed route structure. This is mainly caused by
a collision
due to a of ship
the increase of the number of overtaking encounters concentration
separation of
movements. The probability of a head-on collision is decreased by a better
the traffic.
taken is conceivable that the probability of a
A second order effect is not into account. It
the intentions of
collision given an encounter, decreases with better knowledge about
the other ships. This is the case when the traffic is more structured. Because no data is
available to quantify this improvement, this effect could not be inciuded in the
possible
QRA.
fire/explosions that are
Also the probability of the accidents foundering, hull failure and
related to the number of travelled sea miles, increase.
offshore platforms and
The probabilities of a contact with ships in the anchorage areas,
of stranding, decrease for the proposed route structure. The impact on the probabilities
of a contact against a platform fluctuates strongly. The risks for some platforms
P18, while the risks for other
decrease, for example for the platforms Horizon and
route-bound by
platforms increase. The collision risk for Horizon by a ship decreases
25%. Despite this reduction, Horizon remains the platform with the highest collisiori risk.
total, a in risk of 0,008 incidents per year for platforms is achieved.
In slight reduction
In total, the proposed route structure will result in 0,283 fewer ships involved in an
incident outside the wind farms.
travelled, amount to M€
The extra costs for shipping by the extra miles that have to be
19,3 per year.
-
