Report No. 25648-1-MSCN-rev.2 30
-
6.2 Collision risk of ramming and
drifting against wind turbines
In [1] the collision risk against wind turbines was compared by fihling up the cleared area
with wind turbines, until a total of 6000MW is not done in
on the NCS was reached. This
this study, because the objective structure
was more general, namely to develop a route
as
that makes free much space as possible for other activities at sea, with minor effects
on safety and shipping.
Because the proposed route structure is developed the wind
while taking into account
farms licensed in round
2, it is important to see the impact of the proposed route
structure on these licensed wind farms when they are built. The best way to do that is to
determine the collision risk for these wind farms without changes in the route structure
and the collision risk of the same wind
farms for the proposed route structure and
compare these values.
Variant 1 of [1] is taken as the traffic database changes
with minimum in traffic flows
when the wind
licensed farms are built. Figure 5-2 shows that for this variant, extra
space is cleared of shipping around the wind farms Tromp, Den Helder and Brown
Ridge East. This means that the risk reducing effect of the proposed route structure on
collisions with wind turbines
is already realized in variant 1 for these wind farms. Even
the proposed
more than for route structure, because more space is cleared.
All wind turbines are defined as separate objects. The probability ramming and drifting
of
is determined for each wind turbine.
It is assumed that a drifting ship continues drifting
after a wind turbine is hit. Thus one drifting ship can hit more than one wind turbine. The
ship stops drifting when:
• anchoring is successful (no contact at all);
• the failure is repaired, using the distribution function for repairing;
• 24 hours are passed (the maximum drifting time);
• an emergency towing vessel (ETV) has arrived with sufficient capacity for the
prevailing weather conditions to recover the ship;
The probabilities of drifting,
failure to anchor and the drifting time are derived from the
drifters database that MARIN has been receiving from the Netherlands Coastguard
monthly since 2002. Because the drifters database of the Netherlands Coastguard only
contains the data of the ships have the database
that reported failure, this is not
complete. Therefore, several analyses of AlS data have been performed to achieve a
complete picture of all drifters.
present calculations
In the no ETV is included, which means that the probability of
drifting contacts can be decreased by including one or more ETVs.
For each wind farm a generic configuration of 5 wind turbines is composed
MW
according method described
the in Chapter 5.2. The real configuration will be different
but will have only minor effects on the collision risk per wind turbine. Figure 6-2 contains
the traffic for the proposed route structure with the existing wind farms OWEZ and
Princess Amalia, and the wind farms inciuded in the
licensed in round 2 that are QRA.
Scheveningen Buiten is not included, because this wind farm cannot be built when the
proposed route structure comes into force. The wind farms north of the Wadden Islands
area not included because they do not affect the .safety and shipping in the area of the
proposed route structure. The same wind farms
are inciuded in variant 1. Thus variant 1
this report differs from variant
in 1 in [1] with respect to collisions against wind turbines.
