___________________
Report No. 25648-1-MSCN-rev.2 31
*
»
The collision risk for the traffic without routeing to
measures near the wind farms closer
the coast variant
(thus 1) is presented in Table 6-5. Table 6-6 contains the collision risk
for the wind farms
for the proposed route structure. The probability of a collision per year
is given for ramming and drifting for both non-route
route-bound traffic (R-ships) and
bound traffic (N-ships). Because almost
all nori-route-bound ships, mainly fishing
vessels supply and work vessels, sail
outside the routes more or Iess randomly over
sea,
the behaviour of this group is not affected by a new route structure. Therefore the
same database for non-route-bound traffic has in the same
been used, which results
probabilities for these ships
in Table 6-5 and Table 6-6. The difference in collision risk is
caused by
the route-bound ships. The summarized ramming risk is reduced enormously
from 00592 per year (once in 17 years) for variant 1 to 0,0037 269 years) for
(once in
the proposed route structure. Thus the reduction
factor is about 16 for the ramming risk.
The reduction for drifting risk
for route-bound ships is less: from 0,1603 per year (once in
6,2 years) for variant 1 to 0,1359 per year (once in 7,4 years) for the proposed route
structure. The reason for the large difference in reduction and
between the ramming
drifting collisiori risk is that the drifting
risk is much less sensitive for the distance
betweei, location
the where the failure occurs and the wind farm. Therefore, the
reduction
factor for the drifting risk for route-bound ships is only 1,18. The reduction
factors of 16 and 1,18 are achieved by the wind farms to
in the area closer the coast.
The results for wind farms Den
Helder, Tromp and Brown Ridge East show an opposite
pattern, because the
sea area cleared around these wind farms in variant 1 is larger
than for the proposed route structure. Because the absolute probabilities are low for
these wind farms, they do not affect the overall
reduction. The charige in risk for each
wind farm can be found in Table
6-5 and Table 6-6.
