-
Report No. 25648-1-MSCN-rev.2 34
A
6.3 Total risk
due to the wind farms
Chapter 6.1 contains the extra costs
of accidents and detours outside the wind farms
due to the
changes in the traffic flows. Chapter 6.2 contains the probabilities of contacts
with the
wind turbines but not the costs involved with these contacts. In this chapter all
costs, thus risk and additional sailing costs are quantified. For this
purpose some
assumptions have been with respect
made to the damage of the wind turbines. These
assumptions are
extracted from the studies carried out for individual wind farms. The
most
important assumption is the probability that the wind turbine is lost by
the contact.
The following percentages are used:
• 100% after a ramming contact by a route-bound
ship;
• 20% after a ramming contact by a non-route-bound
ship;
• 85% after a drifting contact by a route-bound
ship;
• 10% after a drifting contact by a non-route-bound
ship;
An amount of M€ 10 is taken for a wind turbine
that is lost.
An amount
of M€ 104 is used for the average damage costs for the ship
that has a
contact with a wind turbine It is expected to the ship
that the damage will be lower in
general.
Table
6-7 is composed based on these assumptions. The left part contains
the
probabilities that a wind turbine is lost, thus the Table
probabilities of 6-5 and Table 6-6
multiplied by the above.
percentages The center part of the table contains the yearly
costs of
accidents with the wind farm and of accidents and extra miles outside the wind
farm. By comparing the columns, it becomes dear that the largest contribution
of the
yearly costs is delivered by of
costs the extra miles. Thereafter, the damage to the wind
turbines gives
the largest contribution.
Only the proposed route structure reduces the number incidents.
of shipping The extra
incidents 0,206 with the
wind farms are completely compensated by the decrease of
0,283 incidents
outside the wind farms. In summary, 0,076 Iess incidents will occur per
year, thus on average one incident Iess in 13 years.
