_________________________.—
Report No. 25648-1-MSCN-rev.2 52
*
Table 9-1 contains the resuits of the analysis of the ships that have crossed the area.
The dumping area of IJmuiden has been crossed
most frequently in 2010. In total, 720
voyages of ships through
the area were counted. Some ships have performed several
voyages. 57 voyages were made by a fishing ship. In 25 cases the was smaller
speed
than 5 knots, which means that the fishing vessel was fishing crossing the
while
dumping area. These 25 crossings were
performed by 12 different fishing vessels. In
nearly all
cases the navigation state of the fishing vessels was 7, meaning that the ship
was
engaged in fishing. Given the fishirig activity and the number of different fishing
vessels that were active in the dumping areas,
it can be concluded that the dumping
area is not avoided by
fishing vessels.
Table 9-1 Ships that have crossed the dumping area in
2010
Dumping area
. Rotterdam Rotterdam
IJmuiden
North South
Crossings
by ships with AlS 720 402 240
Crossings 29
57 35
fishing during crossing 25
16 11
Onlyfishing
dfferentvessels
12 9 7
vessels
observations of fishing (speed over
ground
< 5 knots), each observation 748 394 240
rneans 2 minutes fishing
Ships anchonng
0 0 0
The following incidents can happen in a dumping
area:
• ship sinks,
• ship has a contact with the sea bottom;
• ship anchors;
• fishing vessels that have cpntact with the sea bottom by fishing gear;
• Loss of cargo such as container or other deck cargo.
The probabilities of above
incidents will be quantified for the three dumping areas, for
the proposed route structure. This means that the route-bound traffic will disappear from
the dumping area near IJmuiden, because this dumping area will located in an area
be
that is cleared of shipping. Furthermôre, it
is expected that non-route-bound activities
such fishing will decrease
as in the dumping areas near Rotterdam because these areas
will be located in a busy traffic lane of the moved Maas-North TSS.
Probability of sinking
A ship can sink as
a single incident after being overwhelmed by the sea, which is called
foundering, sink
a or due to a collision with another ship. The first incident has a larger
probability than the second, because the probability that a ship will sink after a collision
in a one-way traffic lane is very
unlikely. Therefore, only the incident of foundering is
considered ii the estimation
of the probability that a ship will sink in the dumping area.
Probability of a container or other deck cargo overboard
The probability of loss of a container or deck cargo
is used in several studies of MARIN
with respect to the risk for a cable or
pipeline. The probability of losing a container is
updated based on new data. Some sources estimate that 10000 containers are lost per
