Report No. 25648-1-MSCN-rev.2 58
11
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Conciusions
The results of the QRA for the proposed route structure without wind farms have been
compared to the results of a base variant. The farms licensed in
results in case the wind
round 2 are built, are compared with variant 1 from [1], thus the variant without
additional routeing measures. The following conclusions can be drawn:
• The proposed route structure is the best option with respect to safety. It is the
only variant for which the total number of decrease.
incidents with shipping will
• The
main impacts on safety by the proposed route structure are:
lncrease of risk
o 0,153 more ships will be involved in a collision. The increase is mainly
caused increase and by the
by an of the number of overtaking collisioris,
higher concentration of shipping. The number of head-on collisions
slightly decreases by the separation of the traffic in opposite directions.
o a small increase of the probability are related to the
of the incidents that
number of sea miles, such as foundering, hulI failure and fire/explosion;
Decrease of risk
o a decrease in the probability of a stranding;
o a decrease in the probability of a contact with a platform;
o a decrease in the probability of a contact with a ship at anchor;
The summation of all incidents outside the wind farms delivers a change of -
0.283 incidents with shipping per year, thus on average 1 incident less in 3.5
years.
• Much of the profit of 0.283 fewer incidents outside the wind is offset by ramming
and drifting contacts with the wind turbines. When all the wind farms are built
0.206 contacts with turbines are expected. total 0.076 fewer
wind Then in
incidents are expected, thus on average 1 incident less in 13 years.
• The impact on the probabilities of a contact against a platform fluctuates
strongly. The risks for some platforms decrease, for example for the platforms
Horizon and while risks for other The collision
P18, the platforms increase. risk
for Horizon due to a route-bound ship decreases by 25%. Despite this reductiori,
Horizon remains the platform with the highest collision risk. In total, a slight
reduction in risk of 0,008 per year for platforms achieved.
incidents is
• The largest contribution of the total yearly extra costs delivered the costs of
is by
the
extra miles. These costs amount M€ 19.3 per year.
• In case all wind farms licensed in round 2 are built, the probability of a contact
with a wind turbine will amount to 0,0592 per year for ramming and 0,1363 for
drifting if
no additional measures are implemented east of the main route from
North Hinder to Texel TSS. In case of the proposed route structure is
implernented the ramming risk will amount 0,0037 per year and the drifting risk
0,1155 per year, thus an improvement factor of respectively for ramming and
16
1.18 for
drifting.
The collision risk of wind turbines by non-route-bound ships remains the same,
because their behaviour is not affected by the proposed route structure.
