_______________
Report No. 25648-1-MSCN-rev.2 59
A -
• The extra incidents
in case the wind farms are built are less than the incidents
saved by the introduction of the proposed route structure.
• The three new anchorage areas near IJmuiden within the proposed route
structure are safer than the anchorage area on the north side, because
existing
the lane
with outgoing traffic from IJmuiden has to be crossed twice. The
anchorage area NW will not be used initially but comes into use when there is a
need to. The anchoring near IJmuiden will become safer for the proposed route
structure than in the present situation.
• The wreck of the Vinca proposed
Gorthon will cause less risk in case of the
route structure, because it will be located outside the routes. However, the
reduction in risk is limited because the passing distance for the ships sailing
near the border of the route route structure is not much more
in the proposed
than the
passing distance in the present traffic situation. The advantage of the
proposed route structure is that the wreck can be ignored when preparing the
sailing plan, because it is not longer traffic route.
located in the
• The probability to
hit the wreck HY2166 on 21,3m LAT in the approach area of
the
IJ-geul is very small. However, in case the wreck comes into the anchorage
area of the proposed route structure, the guaranteed water depth of 22,4m LAT
for the anchorage area for the IJ-geul violated.
is
• The emissions will increase
slightly for the proposed route structure by the extra
miles.
Remark
The
proposed route structure Iets ships sail through a limited number of traffic laries.
This means that in case of an encounter one has a better idea of the intentions of the
other ships, which might decrease
the probability of a collision given an encounter. This
benefit of the
proposed route structure could not be quantifÎed, because the effect is
unknown.
Recommendations
An Emergency
Towing Vessel (ETV) to recover drifting ships can deliver a reduction of
the probability of drifting of more than 50%. The present calculations have been carried
out without an ETV.
For safety, the traffic flows
can be improved on some locations. This required a more
detailed research.
This aspect is dealt with in the FSA.
Assumptions
Within the calculatioris
it is assumed that the drifting ship is not stopped by a contact
with
a wind turbine, but continues drifting. Thus one drifter can count for more than one
drifting contact with wind turbines.
The extra probability calculated and included
of a contact with an offshore platform is in
the tables. However,
the costs of the damage to the platform could not be included,
because no data with respect to such a type of accident is available.
