ReportNo.25648-l-MSCN-rev.2 60
iI;ii!I1
Explanation
for a better understanding of the probability of a collision
The probability of a collision is determined from the calculated number of encounters
between ships. The encounter is classified
based on the course difference between the
ships.
A distinction is made between an overtaking (course difference is less than 60°),
600
crossing (course difference between and 150°) and a head on (course difference
between 150 and 180 encounter. The probability of a collision given encounter, is
an
°)
clearly different
for the three situations. The probability of a collision, given a crossing
encounter is larger than in case of en overtaking encounter. Sometimes this discrete
classification of encounters is too rough for a sound result in a small area.
The probability a collision is based
on singular meetings. When a third ship is involved at
the same
time the probability of a collision will increase, because the number of
encounters increases. For the triple ship encounter, in total six encounters between two
ships are counted, thus three times as much means that
as in a singular encounter. This
the probability
of a collision for a triple encounter is equal to the probability of a collision
in three encounters between ships, thus as if the ships would have met each other in
separate encounters.
The probability of a collision given an ericounter is not geographically
related and
therefore does not depend
on the distance to en object such as a platform, or a wind
turbine. Too few collisions have occurred under these circumstances to be able to
include this in the modeling.
The probability of a collision given en encounter
depends on the type of ship, the ship’s
size and the weather conditions. The calculation of the number of encounters is based
on the distribution of the speed of ships at sea. In some areas, when boarding or
disembarking the pilot, some ships will sail at lower The difference in speed can
speeds.
result
in more encounters. The resuits of the calculations can be improved when these
areas are modeled in more detail. The number of meetings can then be determined
more precisely. A new issue will be how the collision probability changes with the speed
of the ships concerned.
But in any case the differences between variants can be
quantified more precisely.
