Report No. 25648-1-MSCN-rev.2
route-bound traffic contains vessels that mainly have a mission at sea, such as fishing
vessels, supply vessels, working vessels and pleasure crafts.
Within the SAMSON-model both modelled in different way.
groups are a
The route-bound traffic is modelled on the shipping routes in the region of the wind farm.
Because of the locatiori of the different ports and the traffic separation schemes in the
area, most of the route-bound ships sail on a network comparable with the
large of links,
with the
road network. Every ship is allowed to sail ‘anywhere” as long as one complies
rules and regulations. Thus ships could also sail outside the defined network. However,
the number of ships sailing outside the network is very small, because the network
contains the shortest route between ports.
A new traffic database is generated for the location of the wind farm. The location of the
wind farm sail through
is assumed to be a forbidden area, so route-bound traffic will not
the wind farm. This new database is used to determine the probabilities for contact with
a wind turbine.
route-bound
The non-route-bound traffic cannot be modelled the same way as the
traffic, because the information about the journeys is not inctuded in the Lloyds
database. Moreover, the behaviour of these non-route-bound ships at sea is very
route,
different. A non-route-bound ship does not sail from port A to port B along a dear
but from port A to one or more destinatioris at sea and then usually back to the port of
departure A. The behaviour of these ships at sea is mostly unpredictable. Fishing
vessels journey.
also usually sail from one fishing ground to another during one
Therefore, the traffic image of the non-route-bound traffic is modelled by densities of
ships in a so-called grid celI of 8 x 8 km. The size of this celI is historically connected to
the grid ceIl size used in the North Sea. Other sizes of the grid celis can be applied but it
has only a finer grid. The local policy for making
sense when the densities are known on
use of the region of the wind farm is modelled.
Used models
different
The total SAMSON-model consists of many different sub-models for the
accidents. Not all sub-models have to be used to determine the effects of the wind farm.
expected number of rammings and
The followirig models are applied to determine the
driftings with a wind turbine per year:
• Contact with a fixed object (wind turbine)
- as a result of a navigational error (rarnming)
- as a result of an engine faifure (drifting)
anchor for all wind force
The drift model contains a table with the probability of failure to
classes. The failure probability increases strongly with the wind force. Further, the self
repairing time function is modelled to determine the maximum time of the drifting
process without
assistance from outside.
The effect of one or more ETVs (Emergency Towing Vessels), thus vessels that can get
control over the drifting ships by taking her in tow, can be determined by the input of one
or more ETVs. For each ETV the geographical position and a number of characteristics,
such
as speed and towing capacity are required.
No ETVs are modelled in this study.
In case the wind farm has a large impact on the safety of shipping outside the location of
wind wind farm can be compared.
the farm, the risk levels with and without the
