Report No. 25648-1-MSCN-rev.2
To determine
the ‘general” risk level the following models are used:
• Ship-Ship collision model;
• Contact with a platform
- as a result of a navigational error (ramming);
- as a result of an engine failure (drifting);
• Contact with a pier
- as of navigational
a result a error (ramming);
of
- as a result an engine failure (drifting);
• Stranding
- as a result of a navigational error
(ramming);
- as a result of an engine failure
(drifting);
Consequences
A collision (ramming
or drifting) of a ship with a wind turbine can lead to (serious)
damage
to the wind turbine, to the ship, to the environment as a result of an outfiow of
oh from the ship, or personal damages (injuries,
fatalities).
The risk assessment resuits in
drifting and ramming collision frequencies for the full
range of types
all thirty-six ship and eight ship size classes. This subdivision makes it
possible
to perrorm additional calculations. Based on the mean displacement
of each
colliding vessel, added mass and the
expected speed at collision (90% of the service
speed for ramming drifting
and the speed for drifting), the kinetic eriergy of the ship at
the moment
of the collision is calculated.
This energy level is used to calculate
the damage to the ship based partially on
experience and partially complex calculations.
on The calculations are based on the
assumption that
all energy is being absorbed.
Damage to the wind turbine
Due to the limited
energy absorption of the collided object (wind turbine), not all the
kinetic
energy of the colliding ship will be absorbed. The collapse behaviour of the wind
turbine has been studied ([4] of main report), The conclusion of the study is
that for
almost all ship types wind turbine collapses
the (static) and that only a fraction of the
energy of the ship will
be absorbed. For further analysis of the damage to the wind
turbine the following two collapse types are being distinguished:
• Pile failure; the wind turbine collapses by bending at the
point of impact caused by
plastic deformation (first picture
in Figure A 2). The collapsed part of the wind turbine
will stay attached
to the rest of the turbine. Finally the turbine falls towards the ship
or away from the ship. When the turbine collapses towards the ship the rotor
and
nacelle can fall on the deck of the
ship.
• Soli failure; the wind turbine collapses
by bending at the foundation of the turbine at
the bottom
of the sea caused by plastic deformation (second and third picture from
Figure A
2).The turbine can, as a result of this deformation, fracture at the
bottom of
the sea or it can also be pushed over (inciuding bottom of the
the sea).
