_____________
Report No. 25648-1-MSCN-rev.2
-- -...
- --—
Figure A 2 Figures of the different collapse types
determined by dynamic
The collapse type that will occur after a collision can only be
calculatioris, Some experts have estimated the frequency of occurrence of the different
collapse types their research. possible (yet) to estimate the
based on When It was riot
the pile with the turbine
frequency, one has chosen a conservative result. For example,
the construction and the
can fali towards the ship or away from the ship depending on
environmental factors. For the calculations, it is assumed that the turbine will fali on the
ship in all cases of a pile failure.
In Table A 1 an overview is given of the different collapse types as a result of a ramming
or drifting collision ship size class. the expected damage to the ships is
per In addition,
given in the table.
In case of a frontal or frontal/lateral (grazing) collision (ramming) of the turbine there will
be (serious) damage to the bow of the but no (serious) damage to the side of the
ship,
of the ship in front of the
ship, where the cargo tanks are located. The construction
collision bulkhead is very rigid, which causes the damage to be limited to the front of the
ship. Thus, it will not cause cargo (oil) or fuel oil to flow out of the ship.
case of grazing the rigid bow, the ship will absorb the kinetic
In construction with the
ship
energy without causing much damage. There could be some damage to the
because the pile and the nacelle fall on the ship.
No environmental damage is expected in case of a ramming collision, because the pile
penetrate the hulI of the
is constructed in such a way that no parts stick out which could
ship and cause the outfiow of oil and/or chemicals.
Environmental expected drifting collision, where the huli of
damage can be in case of a
This can
the ship can be penetrated by some thickenings of the pile. cause the ouffiow
of oil and/or chemicals.
Personal when the pile and/or a part of
damages (injuries/fatalities) are only expected
the turbine collapses on the ship.
When wind collapses that some oil from the turbine will flow
a turbine it can be expected
litres mineral is with
out. The pollution that results would be, at most, 250 of oil, which
respect to the viscosity and evaporation comparable to the cargo oil in the SAMSON
model, and litre diesel oil (comparable bunker oil in the SAMSON-model).
100 to
