- 7 - 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
The Netherlands Antilles ceased to exist on 10 October 2010, when Curaçao and Sint Maarten 
acquired the status of countries within the Kingdom, alongside the Netherlands and Aruba. The 
three other islands, Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba became part of the Netherlands with the 
equivalent status of a municipality. Collectively, the six islands are now known as the Caribbean 
part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.  
 
The CPT’s delegation visited Bonaire, Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten. It examined the treatment 
of inmates and the conditions of detention in the prison establishments located on each of the four 
islands visited. It also focussed on the situation of persons deprived of their liberty by the police. In 
addition, on Aruba and Curaçao, the delegation looked at the treatment of involuntary patients 
placed in psychiatric facilities and of irregular migrants in immigration detention centres. The 
situation of juveniles deprived of their liberty was also examined. 
 
The delegation received very good co-operation from the relevant authorities during the visit. 
Nevertheless, the principle of cooperation also requires that decisive action be taken to improve the 
situation in the light of the CPT’s key recommendations, and the findings of the 2014 visit suggest 
that while progress could be identified on a number of issues, continued efforts are needed to ensure 
full implementation of all its recommendations.  
 
Policing 
 
No allegations of ill-treatment by police officers of arrested persons were received in Bonaire. 
However, in Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten some allegations of ill-treatment of persons, 
including of juveniles, were received, which usually consisted of kicks and punches to the body 
after the person had been handcuffed and brought under control. The authorities should regularly 
remind police officers to use no more force than is strictly necessary and that ill-treatment will be 
punished accordingly. Further, the duration of remand detention on police premises, which may last 
up to 10 days, should be reduced to the shortest amount of time possible. As regards more 
specifically Curaçao, full authority for the care of police detainees placed in Block 1 of the Centre 
for Detention and Correction in Curaçao (SDKK) should be transferred to the prison authorities. 
 
In relation to safeguards against ill-treatment by police officers, most detained persons interviewed 
only met with their lawyer for the first time when appearing before a judge, which could be up to 
three days and 16 hours after the initial arrest. Steps should be taken to guarantee the right of access 
to a lawyer in practice, including during any police interview, as from the very outset of deprivation 
of liberty. Further, steps should be taken to guarantee that all detained persons are able to notify a 
third party of their deprivation of liberty and receive feedback from police officers when such 
notification has been carried out by the police.  
 
Material conditions were poor in many of the police stations visited as well as in Block 1 at SDKK. 
In Aruba, the CPT’s delegation had been informed that San Nicolas Police Station was not used for 
overnight detention which turned out to be incorrect. Persons were being detained for several days 
in this station, including a 15-year old boy who spent ten days in conditions that could be 
considered as amounting to inhuman and degrading treatment. The CPT recommends that the 
detention cells at San Nicolas Police Station be taken out of use until such time as they have been 
fully refurbished and the sewage problems properly resolved. More generally, juveniles should not 
be held overnight in police stations. Further, in Aruba and Curaçao, the current practice of keeping 
detained persons, deemed to be at risk of suicide, naked in their cells should be ended; instead, such 
persons should be the subject of a specific care protocol.
