- 8 - 
In Sint Maarten, urgent measures should be taken to improve conditions at Philipsburg Police 
Station, and steps taken to ensure that persons are not detained in excess of three days and in any 
event never longer than 10 days at this station. In Curaçao, two persons had been held in police 
stations for some eight months in conditions akin to solitary confinement; every effort should be 
made to find alternative solutions to long-term detention at police stations. 
 
Prisons 
 
The CPT’s delegation found that the Dutch Caribbean Correctional Institution (JICN) in Bonaire 
was well-managed and provided a safe environment with good staff-prisoner relations. Some 
progress had been made at the three other prisons visited compared to previous visits. However, at 
the Correctional Institution in Aruba (KIA), SDKK and Point Blanche Prison in Sint Maarten, a 
number of allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners by staff were received and a clear message 
should be delivered to prison officers that all forms of ill-treatment, including verbal abuse, are not 
acceptable and will be punished accordingly. Further, inter-prisoner violence continued to represent 
a serious threat to prisoners’ safety in these three prisons. The prison management in each of these 
establishments should develop a strategy to address the challenge of inter-prisoner violence, 
including adequate monitoring of the situation and identification of risks.  
 
As regards material conditions, they were generally very poor at KIA and in several blocks of 
SDKK, with crumbling walls, dilapidated accommodation areas, leaking pipes and serious sewage 
problems. Urgent action to improve conditions in the vulnerable persons’ unit (IBA) and the 
segregation unit at KIA and in Block 1 of SDDK is recommended. The CPT raises several concerns 
with regard to the extensive expansion works at Pointe Blanche Prison and recommends that a 
coherent strategy to combat overcrowding be put in place, which includes alternative sanctions, 
conditional release and reduced use of remand custody. Similar proposals are put forward in 
relation to Bonaire where a new much larger prison facility is being built. More needs to be done in 
all the prisons visited to ensure prisoners, male and female, are engaged in purposeful activities of a 
varied nature. As regards contact with the outside world, the CPT recommends that prisoners be 
granted a minimum of one visit of one hour per week and that inmates be able to receive visits 
without physical separation in the absence of specific security concerns. Prisoners who are visited 
infrequently, notably foreign nationals, should be allowed to accumulate visiting time and be 
granted increased access to the telephone. 
 
With the exception of JICN Bonaire, high levels of staff absenteeism were noted which affected 
staffing ratios and also led to excessive overtime worked by some prison officers. In order to 
improve relations between prisoners and staff and increase staff motivation, the reasons for the high 
levels of absenteeism should be tackled and the capacity and role of prison officers further 
developed. Further, there is a need to recruit additional staff. The CPT also recommends that in the 
event of a strike by staff, an agreement guaranteeing a minimum service for inmates should be in 
place. More generally, the delegation observed gaps in the documentation held by the prison 
administration, particularly at SDKK. For example, personal custody records were incomplete and 
no registers were kept with regard to incidents, complaints, use of force and means of restraint.
