- 9 - 
As regards discipline and segregation, procedural safeguards for prisoners suspected of having 
committed a disciplinary offence should be strengthened and solitary confinement as a disciplinary 
punishment should not exceed 14 days. The disciplinary unit of KIA was found to be unfit for 
holding human beings and, while acknowledging the steps taken by the Aruban authorities to 
improve the cleanliness and hygiene in this unit, the CPT considers that further action is still 
required before these cells are adequate for accommodating prisoners. The situation of prisoners 
segregated for their own protection, notably in Curaçao, should be improved and a specific policy 
for managing these persons should be drawn up. 
 
The health-care services at KIA and SDKK prisons suffered from financial insecurity, resulting in 
delays or no access to external specialist care and laboratory testing. Further, at SDKK the situation 
was more critical as health-care staff and pharmacy bills had not been paid for many months. The 
provision of health-care services in KIA, SDKK and Pointe Blanche Prisons should be reviewed: 
medical screening upon admission was generally inadequate, the recording of injuries poor and 
medical confidentiality not fully respected.  
 
The forensic psychiatric support unit (FOBA) at SDKK offered good material conditions and a 
positive atmosphere. By contrast, a similar unit at KIA (IBA) offered poor conditions and provided 
minimal psychological and psychiatric treatment. These units cannot be considered as proper 
psychiatric institutions appropriate for offenders who have been ordered to undergo psychiatric 
treatment. Indeed, in all four prisons, the delegation encountered prisoners who were in need of 
improved mental health care or even placement in a hospital. 
 
Foreign nationals held under aliens legislation 
 
Targeted visits were carried out to the immigration detention facilities of Centro Dakota in Aruba 
and of Illegalen Barakken in Curaçao. Material conditions could generally be considered as 
adequate. However, the regime at Illegalen Barakken was particularly restrictive and in both 
facilities there was a lack of purposeful activities offered to persons held longer than a few days. 
Further, staff at both facilities had not received any specific training on working with irregular 
migrants and safeguards, such as a medical screening upon arrival and receiving information in a 
language an immigration detainee understands, were lacking. Appropriate regulations for the 
detention of irregular migrants, including the introduction of an effective legal remedy entailing 
legal assistance, should be developed and adopted.  
 
Juveniles 
 
The situation for young persons at JICN was largely positive; staff were trained to work with 
juveniles and treated them in a correct and respectful manner, and several programmes were in 
place to provide meaningful activities for the young prisoners. Nevertheless, care should be taken 
not to place juveniles with young adults. By contrast, at KIA, the conditions of detention and 
activities in place for juveniles were not conducive to developing a supportive environment to assist 
their educational development and the enhancement of their social skills. Moreover, the situation of 
juveniles held on remand at Philipsburg Police Station in Sint Maarten was totally inappropriate and 
the CPT trusts that the new 20-place juvenile detention unit will provide suitable alternative 
arrangements.
