- 12 - 
The three other islands, Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba (hereinafter “the BES islands”), 
had voted for direct ties with the Netherlands and are now part of the Netherlands, constituting the 
Caribbean Netherlands (Caribisch Nederland). The relationship’s legal form is that each island has 
the status of public body within the meaning of Article 134 of the Dutch Constitution. In broad 
terms, their position resembles that of Dutch municipalities, with adjustments for their small size, 
their distance from the Netherlands and their geographic location in the Caribbean region. Their 
status has been laid down in an Act of Parliament (Wet Openbare lichamen BES).  
 
These changes constituted a modification of the internal constitutional relations within the 
Kingdom of the Netherlands. The Kingdom of the Netherlands accordingly remained the subject of 
international law with which agreements are concluded. Further, the Charter of the Kingdom, in 
Articles 3(1)(b) and 43(2), provides that foreign relations and the safeguarding of fundamental 
human rights and freedoms, legal certainty and good governance are a Kingdom affair. 
 
 
4. Following the report on the CPT’s 2007 visit to Aruba and the Netherlands Antilles, the 
Council of Ministers for the Kingdom decided on 18 January 2008 to request from both Aruba and 
the Netherlands Antilles reports on the implementation of the CPT recommendations, in order to 
identify progress made as well as work that remained to be done. This monitoring was carried out 
by two legal experts and entailed drawing up reports on a six monthly basis and subsequently yearly 
1
reports. The last report was issued in January 2013.  
 
The CPT welcomes this process of direct monitoring of the implementation of its 
recommendations, considering it good practice. Following the end of this monitoring process and 
taking into consideration the consequences of the important constitutional changes referred to above 
and the need to actively pursue the dialogue with the authorities of the Kingdom of the Netherlands 
and with the various authorities of the Caribbean part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the 
Committee decided to organise an ad hoc visit to the Caribbean part of the Kingdom of the 
Netherlands.  
 
The main objective of the visit was to examine the treatment of inmates and the conditions 
of detention in the four prison establishments in the Caribbean part of the Kingdom of the 
Netherlands. The CPT’s delegation also focussed on the situation of persons deprived of their 
liberty by the police. In addition, on Aruba and Curaçao, the delegation looked at the treatment of 
involuntary patients placed in psychiatric facilities and of irregular migrants in immigration 
detention centres. The situation of juveniles deprived of their liberty was also examined. 
 
  
                                                 
1
  See reports at Parliamentary website of the Kingdom of the Netherlands -Voortgangsrapportages voor Aruba, 
Curaçao en Sint Maarten inzake de implementatie en uitvoering van verbeteringen van de detentiefaciliteiten.
