- 14 - 
7. The delegation received very good co-operation from the relevant authorities during the 
visit. It was granted full access to all places it wished to visit and to all documentation it wished to 
consult. It was also able to interview in private persons deprived of their liberty with whom it 
wished to speak. All staff met by the delegation at the establishments visited made a genuine effort 
to be helpful and co-operative. 
 
The CPT also wishes to express its appreciation for the excellent assistance provided before 
and during the visit by the liaison officer, Martin Kuijer, and deputy liaison officers, Clarinda Coert, 
Marc van Erve, Gimena van der Gen, Patricia Hassell and Ron van der Veer. 
 
 
8. The principle of co-operation set out in the Convention is not limited to steps taken to 
facilitate the task of a visiting delegation. It also requires that decisive action be taken, including at 
the highest political level, to improve the situation in the light of the Committee’s key 
recommendations. The Committee could certainly identify progress on a number of issues, such as a 
reduction in the allegations of ill-treatment, improved safeguards against ill-treatment by police 
officers and better material conditions in certain police stations. However, several longstanding 
recommendations, on issues such as length of police custody, inter-prisoner-violence and staffing 
levels in prisons, have not been adequately addressed. 
 
The CPT trusts that the relevant authorities will accelerate in the future the implementation 
of all its recommendations.  
 
 
E. Immediate observations under Article 8, paragraph 5, of the Convention 
 
 
9. At the end of the visit the delegation made an immediate observation, in pursuance of 
Article 8, paragraph 5, of the Convention, as regards the disciplinary cells in the Aruba Correctional 
Institution, requesting that, until such time as these cells were provided with sufficient access to 
natural light and adequate ventilation, they should not be used for accommodating prisoners. The 
delegation further requested a radical improvement of the cleanliness and hygiene in the 
disciplinary sections. 
 
The immediate observation was confirmed at the meeting with the Aruban authorities on 21 
May, at the meeting with the Dutch authorities on 22 May, and by letter of 6 June from the 
Executive Secretary ad interim of the CPT. The delegation requested the authorities of the Kingdom 
of the Netherlands to provide the Committee with a response by 1 September 2014 as to the action 
taken to remedy this issue.  
 
By letter of 24 September 2014 (in Dutch only), the Kingdom of the Netherlands’ 
authorities provided a response to the immediate observation and to other comments raised by the 
CPT’s delegation in its preliminary observations. The response has been taken into account in the 
relevant sections of the report.
