- 16 - 
II. FACTS FOUND DURING THE VISIT AND ACTION PROPOSED 
 
 
BONAIRE 
 
 
A. Police 
 
 
1. Preliminary remarks 
 
 
11. Persons who have been apprehended by the police and ordered into custody 
(inverzekeringstelling) are legally under the responsibility of the Police Corps Caribbean 
2
Netherlands (KPCN). In March 2011, however, the cell blocks at both Kralendijk and Rincon 
Police Stations, the only two police stations with detention capacity, were taken out of service and 
police custody was moved completely to the premises of Dutch Caribbean Correctional Institution 
3
(hereafter “JICN” ), with JICN taking full responsibility for the care of the detained persons. 
Consequently, the delegation did not visit any police stations.  
 
 
12. Arrested persons are held in Block H (Arrestantenzorg), which is separated from other 
blocks of JICN. Further questioning by police officials can take place either at JICN or at a police 
station. When an arrested person is transferred for questioning, the responsibility for his/her care 
4
lies with the accompanying police officials. Both the KPCN and JICN fall under the responsibility 
of the Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice. 
 
 
13.  The relevant legislation regulating deprivation of liberty by the police has remained largely 
unchanged since the previous visit in 2007, despite the constitutional reform in October 2010. Most 
of the legislation has been renamed, replacing ‘Netherlands Antilles’ with ‘BES’ (which stands for 
Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba). The Code of Criminal Procedure BES (CCP BES) currently in 
force on the BES islands, therefore, is still almost identical to the old Netherlands Antilles Code of 
5
1996. A draft Criminal Procedure Code was presented to the respective Ministers of Justice of 
Aruba, Curaçao, Sint Maarten and the Netherlands in November 2013 and is expected to be 
submitted to the respective parliaments in 2015. Once adopted, this Code should apply on all 
islands of the Caribbean part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. 
  
                                                 
2
  The cell block at Kralendijk had been qualified as appalling in the report on the visit in 2007. See 2007 
(CPT/Inf (2008) 2 (Part 2), paragraphs 7 and 21. 
3
  Justitiële Inrichting Caribisch Nederland. 
4
  Paragraph 5.8 of the Handbook Detainees Care. 
5
  The Code of Criminal Procedure (CCP) Wetboek van Strafvordering (P.B. 1996, no. 164) entered into force in 
November 1996.
