- 17 - 
In brief, persons suspected of having committed a criminal offence may be held by the 
6
police for questioning for a maximum of six hours. Thereafter, if the needs of the investigation so 
require, the person may be placed in police custody for a maximum period of two days 
7
(inverzekeringstelling), on the decision of a prosecutor or of an assistant prosecutor reporting to the 
8
prosecutor in writing or orally as soon as possible and within 24 hours. Police custody may be 
9
further extended by the prosecutor for an additional maximum period of eight days. However, the 
suspect must be brought before the investigating judge as soon as possible - and within 24 hours - 
10
after the beginning of such an extension in order to decide on its lawfulness. Thus the legal 
maximum period before a person deprived of their liberty is brought before a judge amounts to 
three days and 16 hours.  
 
Thereafter, a person may be placed in remand detention (voorlopige hechtenis) as regulated 
in Title VIII of the CCP BES. A maximum of eight days of custody (bewaring) may be ordered by 
11
the investigating judge, renewable once. This detention, however, as well as any further remand 
12
custody (gevangenhouding en gevangenneming), should take place at a remand facility under the 
13
responsibility of the head of that facility; that is, the JICN. 
 
 Arrested persons can spend a maximum of ten days in the police custody block before being 
released or transferred to another block. Juveniles and young adults are generally transferred to a 
dedicated block upon admission.  
 
 
14. The delegation did not receive any allegations of ill-treatment by police officers on Bonaire 
at the time of arrest or during the subsequent interview process and detention. Equally, there were 
no allegations of ill-treatment by prison staff of persons detained at the police custody block at 
JICN. Most persons interviewed stated that they had been treated well both by police and prison 
officers.  
 
 
2. Safeguards against ill-treatment 
 
 
15. The CPT attaches particular importance to three fundamental safeguards for persons 
deprived of their liberty by the police: the right of those concerned to inform a close relative or 
another person of their choice of their situation; the right of access to a lawyer; and the right of 
access to a doctor. These three rights represent fundamental safeguards against the ill-treatment of 
persons deprived of their liberty, which should apply from the very outset of the deprivation of 
liberty. In addition, it is important that all detained persons are informed of their rights in a 
language they understand.  
 
  
                                                 
6
  Article 80(1) CCP BES. This article also provides that persons may not be questioned between 10pm and 8am. 
Therefore this initial period may in fact last up to 16 hours. 
7
  In Dutch, a hulpofficier van justitie, who can also be a senior police officer. 
8
  Article 83 CCP BES, paragraphs 1 and 4, and Article 87(1). 
9
  Article 87(2) CCP BES. 
10
  Article 89(1) CCP BES. 
11
  Articles 92(1) and 93 CCP BES. 
12
  See Articles 95 to 99 of the CCP BES. 
13
  Articles 94(2) and 99 CCP BES.
