- 18 - 
 
16. Article 82 CCP states that a person who has been arrested shall be promptly informed of the 
reasons for his/her arrest, the right to an attorney, and the right to remain silent. Persons interviewed 
confirmed that they had been informed promptly of these rights, and also of the right to see a doctor 
and of the right to notify a relative of their detention. They were provided with a written document 
(available in Dutch, Papiamentu, English and Spanish) stating these rights.  
 
 
14
17. According to Article 42(1) of the Police Code of Conduct BES a police officer shall 
immediately inform a relative or household member of the detained person’s arrest. If the detained 
person is a minor the police shall do this on their own initiative. However, if the detained person is 
an adult, notification shall be made only upon request. If circumstances prevent the police from 
doing so when a detainee is not a resident of Bonaire, the consulate of the country of which he/she 
15
is a resident should be notified of the arrest. 
 
Most persons interviewed indicated that their right to inform a close relative or another 
person of their choice of their arrest had been respected. Notification was usually performed by the 
police and feedback was provided to the detained persons. 
 
 
18. Arrested persons have a right to consult a lawyer before the first interview by police. 
However, most persons interviewed by the delegation stated that they had not met with their lawyer 
until their first appearance before the judge, i.e. after some two or three days. Suspects were asked 
to sign a waiver when they chose not to consult a lawyer before the start of the police interview.  
 
The CPT recommends that the Dutch authorities ensure that all persons arrested have 
the right of access to a lawyer from the very outset of their deprivation of liberty, including 
during any police interview. Such a right should include access to an ex officio lawyer if 
required. 
 
 
19. The delegation interviewed a number of prisoners from the islands of Saba and Sint 
16
Eustatius, who informed the delegation that there were no lawyers based on these small islands. If 
arrested persons wished to speak to a lawyer, they usually did so by phone or videoconference with 
lawyers from Sint Maarten or Bonaire. However, as compensation for travel for lawyers is very 
limited, arrested persons rarely saw a lawyer before they were transferred to Bonaire.  
  
                                                 
14
  Ambtsinstructie politie BES (Official Bulletin of the Netherlands Antilles 2001, no. 73), (hereinafter Police 
Code of Conduct).   
15
  Article 42(2) of the Police Code of Conduct BES. 
16
  Sint Eustatius has a population of around 3,600, while Saba has a population of around 1,800.
