- 19 - 
The delegation was also informed that suspects could be detained by the police for a 
maximum period of eighteen days in police cell blocks on Sint Eustatius and Saba before being 
transferred to the JICN on Bonaire. This raises a number of questions. Given the fact that there is no 
permanent court presence on the islands, there may be difficulties in ensuring that a suspect is 
brought physically before a judge within the maximum of three days and 16 hours, as well as at the 
end of the first extension of custody, namely after ten days of ‘inverzekeringstelling’. The judicial 
control of the treatment of persons in custody on police premises, however, is an important 
safeguard against ill-treatment. Therefore, such persons should be physically brought before a judge 
at regular intervals, preferably of four days at most. Also, Article 94(2) CCP BES prescribes that 
‘bewaring’, which is the additional custody following the first ten days, should take place at a 
remand facility under the responsibility of the head of that facility, and therefore not at a police 
station. Finally, the CPT was informed that plans are in place to build a small prison on Sint 
Eustatius. This will bring additional complications regarding access to a lawyer and judicial control 
of treatment of persons in custody.  
 
The CPT wishes to receive the observations of the Dutch authorities on the above-
mentioned issues as well as confirmation that arrested persons are indeed brought before a 
judge as required by the CCP BES. The Committee recommends that the safeguards against 
ill-treatment be reinforced in the light of the above remarks. 
 
 
20. Detainees in Block H have access to the medical services of JICN. The delegation did not 
receive any complaints regarding access to a doctor by detainees during police custody.  
 
 
21. Custody registers were kept in an adequate manner. The delegation noted that the 
administration at Block H was satisfactory, as it was in the rest of the prison.  
 
 
3. Conditions of detention 
 
 
22. The police custody block at JICN (Block H) consisted of twelve cells, two of which were 
used as isolation cells for the prison population; access to natural light was adequate and ventilation 
sufficient. Each of the cells was equipped with a bed, a table, a chair and a semi-partitioned toilet; 
however, they measured a mere 6 m². The cell for suspected body-packers was equipped with 
CCTV and an adapted toilet. Detainees had access to the shower block twice a day and outdoor 
exercise was offered twice a day for 30 minutes.      
 
The CPT considers that a cell size of 6 m² could be considered acceptable for single 
occupancy for short periods, on condition that detained persons are able to spend a reasonable part of 
the day outside the cell.   
 
The CPT recommends that detained persons be offered additional time outside their cell, 
particularly when they are held in Block H for more than two days.
