- 21 - 
B. Dutch Caribbean Correctional Institution - JICN 
 
 
1. Preliminary remarks 
 
 
24. JICN, Location Bonaire, has progressively been transformed since 2008 from a remand 
prison to an establishment accommodating persons in police custody and remand and sentenced 
prisoners. 
 
Following the CPT’s report on the 2007 visit and in preparation for the transfer of 
responsibility for the prison to the Dutch authorities, the Dutch agency responsible for custodial 
17
institutions (or “DJI” ) developed an action plan for the improvement of the prison. The official 
capacity was doubled in 2008 to 52, expanded further to 76 in 2010 and then again in 2012 with the 
addition of pre-fabricated container cells. At the time of the visit, the prison had an official capacity 
of 112 and was holding 77 persons, of whom 24 were in remand custody and two were women. 
 
However, the current premises remain a temporary solution, as a new facility is being built 
on a different location with an intended capacity of 140 places (remand, sentenced, juvenile and 
female prisoners). This new facility is planned to be operational in 2015.  
 
 
25. The CPT welcomes the efforts of Dutch authorities to improve conditions of detention. 
However, it notes that the current prison population rate is already high (equivalent to 
approximately 460 per 100,000) and the envisaged capacity of the new facility, if fully used, would 
lead to a rate of imprisonment for Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba ranking among the highest in the 
world.  
 
 For its part, the CPT is far from convinced that providing additional accommodation will 
18
offer a lasting solution to overcrowding. Expanding prison capacity carries the risk of prison 
populations rising in tandem with the increased capacity. The Committee considers that it would be 
far preferable for a strategy for the sustainable reduction of the prison population to be put in place, 
which ensures that imprisonment is in practice the measure of last resort at all stages of the criminal 
justice system, from pre-trial to the execution of sentences. In the light of experience in certain 
other jurisdictions, consideration might also be given to avoiding sending persons to prison for short 
periods. Instead, such sentences could be served in the community. 
 
The CPT recommends that the Dutch authorities adopt and implement a coherent 
strategy designed to combat high imprisonment rates, taking due account of the relevant 
Council of Europe recommendations in this area, such as Recommendation R (99) 22 
concerning prison population inflation; Rec (2000) 22 of 29 November 2000 on improving the 
implementation of the European rules on community sanctions and measures; Rec (2003) 22 
on conditional release (parole); Rec (2006) 13 on the use of remand in custody; and 
Recommendation CM/Rec (2010)1 on the Council of Europe Probation Rules. 
  
 The CPT wishes to be informed when the new facility becomes operational and to 
receive information on the numbers and categories of prisoners held. 
 
                                                 
17
  Dienst Justitiële Inrichtingen. 
18
  While JICN was not full at the time of the visit, it had often been full in the past.
