- 22 - 
26. At the outset, the CPT would like to state that it found JICN, Location Bonaire, to be very 
well-managed and providing a safe and constructive environment for its prisoners. Positive 
examples included the introduction of a mentorship programme (see also paragraph 32) and the 
communication of management with the committee of detainees (gedetineerdencommissie/ 
GeDeCo).  
 
 
27. As in 2007, the delegation heard no allegations of ill-treatment by staff at JICN. On the 
contrary, the relations between prisoners and staff appeared to be good, and the atmosphere was 
generally respectful. 
 
 
2. Conditions of detention 
 
 
a. material conditions  
 
 
28.  JICN is made up of an old building and a new part.  The new part consisted mainly of 
offices and container-cells. Each cell was equipped with one set of bunk beds, a table, two chairs, a 
cupboard, two fans and a television, with adequate access to natural light and sufficient ventilation. 
The in-cell toilet, shower and sink were semi-partitioned. However, there was no air-conditioning 
and in certain blocks no effective protection from the sun; on days with less wind, temperatures 
could reportedly rise up to 50 degrees Celsius in certain cells.  
 
The CPT recommends that the Dutch authorities take steps to mitigate the extremely 
high temperatures inside the containers. 
 
 
29. The old building contained cells of different sizes, while all had little access to natural light 
and only limited ventilation; the cells were warm, dark and dusty and did not provide good 
conditions of detention. The CPT delegation was informed that the new facility, which is planned to 
become operational in 2015, should provide much better conditions of detention for all prisoners.  
 
 The CPT trusts that the material conditions in the new facility will be in line with CPT 
standards. 
 
 
b. regime 
 
 
30. Prisoners had access to the gym two or more times a week. JICN has a library, but the offer 
of books was very limited. All prisoners had access on their landings to a kitchen where they could 
prepare their own food and to a washing machine and dryer. 
 
In the new part, prisoners could move about freely for much of the day in the outdoor space 
around the cell blocks or inside in the recreation rooms. In addition, they had access to the outdoor 
exercise yard where they could play a range of ball games.  
 
In the old building, prisoners also had access to the outdoor exercise yard for two hours per 
day, with some additional time for group sports. Otherwise, they remained inside in the recreation 
room or corridors on their landing.
