- 23 - 
 
31. Purposeful activities are of crucial importance for the well-being of any prisoner. As regards 
more specifically sentenced prisoners, such activities are essential to render meaningful a term of 
imprisonment, help their rehabilitation and prepare them for life in the community.  
 
The delegation heard several complaints from prisoners about limited possibilities for work 
and education. At the time of the visit, work was available for approximately 50% of the prisoners, 
but most of these jobs were of a very simple nature and provided no further qualifications to assist 
19
reintegration following prison release.  
 
Opportunities for (professional) education were scarce. It was clear that efforts had been 
made to develop the curriculum over the years. Several courses were offered on subjects such as 
welding, music, drawing, aggression management training, and hair, skin and nail care. However, 
the range of activities, the number of places available and the frequency of the courses remained 
20
limited. Currently, there is no basic education for adults, although plans are in place.  
 
 The CPT recommends that the Dutch authorities pursue their efforts to offer 
purposeful activities to all prisoners. 
 
 
c. juveniles 
 
 
32. One of the cardinal principles enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of 
21 22
the Child and in the European Rules for juvenile offenders is that juveniles should only be 
deprived of their liberty as a last resort and for the shortest possible period of time and that in all 
23
action concerning them, their best interests shall be a primary consideration. The CPT’s basic 
position is that those juveniles who do have to be deprived of their liberty should be held in 
facilities specially designed for persons of this age, offering regimes tailored to their needs and 
staffed by persons trained in dealing with young persons.   
 
While the Netherlands, Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten have all changed their Criminal 
Codes to include placement in a juvenile institution (plaatsing in een inrichting voor jeugdigen/PIJ) 
as a measure for juveniles, this measure does not yet exist in law on Bonaire. Juveniles sentenced to 
incarceration are held at the special youth wing (Block G) of JICN, for prisoners up to the age of 24 
(young adults or JoVo). At the time of the visit, JoVo had a capacity of 18 and was holding seven 
prisoners under the age of 24.  
                                                 
19
  There are 12 places in the prison workshop where prisoners are trained in welding, painting and carpentry. An 
additional 10 positions are available in a project with the foundation Krusada. This cooperation was in the 
process of being expanded at the time of the visit. Other work includes cleaning, ice and water delivery and 
simple repairs.  
20
  In the second half of 2013, three women participated in two separate courses on nail styling and hair and skin 
care. Eight prisoners completed a music course; 11 prisoners participated in arts class; and 14 prisoners learnt 
how to build kites. 
21
  Articles 3 and 37.b of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. 
22
  Rules 5 and 10 of the European Rules for juvenile offenders subject to sanctions or measures 
(Recommendation CM/Rec(2008)11). 
23
  See General Comment No. 14 (2013) on the right of the child to have his or her best interests taken as a 
primary consideration (Article 3, paragraph 1) by the Committee on the Rights of the Child. See also the 1985 
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (“Beijing Rules”), the 
1990 United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (“Havana Rules”) and the 
1990 United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency (“Riyadh Guidelines”).
