- 24 - 
 
Prisoners in JoVo are generally above the age of 18, but minors may also be held in this 
block. JoVo was physically separated from other blocks, while sharing the exercise yard with Block 
F, dedicated to prisoners in need of special care (Zorg). Prison officers working in Blocks G and F 
had gone through additional training on how to engage with young prisoners. Young adults 
interviewed by the CPT stressed that they were well treated by prison staff and a positive and 
friendly atmosphere was observed by the delegation.   
 
Each individual was assigned a mentor from among the prison officers. In the case of 
juveniles and young adults from Saba or Sint Eustatius, the mentor could travel with them on the 
trip back home, to assist in the transition. The mentorship programme, which was also in place for 
adult prisoners, appeared to be functioning well and contributed to positive relations between 
prisoners and prison staff.  
 
 
33. Juveniles and young adults staying at JoVo were allowed to stay outside their cells during 
the day, except during lunchtime from 12 a.m. to 1 p.m. They had access to the space in front of the 
cells, the exercise yard, and a recreation room with some games, a kitchen, a washing machine and 
a dryer. Visits of up to one hour were allowed on a daily basis, with one extended special visit a 
month. Prisoners from Sint Eustatius and Saba were provided with a $15 phone card at the end of 
24
each month to facilitate contact with their families. Facilities for video calls exist, but these were 
not much used. 
 
The CPT noted that every person held at JoVo had his own sentence plan drawn up, based 
upon conversations during the admission process and observation during their first four to six 
weeks in prison. The head of the unit informed the delegation that she had weekly meetings with the 
unit staff, the psychologist, the social worker and the medical service, discussing each individual 
juvenile. Juveniles attended compulsory education in the mornings. An educational programme, the 
so-called ‘Social Opportunity Project for the Young’ (Sociaal Kanstraject / SKJ), was in place with 
a duration of 9 months. The programme included subjects such as mathematics, languages, social 
skills, computer skills and general development.   
 
Young adults who already had their basic qualifications were allowed to work instead.  
 
Other activities included classes for welding, music lessons and sports. More recently, a 
project had been introduced on how to train and take care of puppies. 
 
The Committee welcomes the steps that have been taken for juveniles and young adults held 
in JoVo. Nevertheless, the number of activities and educational programmes, particularly in the 
afternoons, should be further enhanced. 
 
The CPT recommends that the regime for juveniles and young adults be further 
developed in order to provide a full programme of activities, including education, personal 
and social development, vocational training, rehabilitation and preparation for release. 
 
  
                                                 
24
  This applied to all prisoners from Saba and Sint Eustatius.
