- 25 - 
34. The CPT acknowledges the difficulty in making adequate arrangements for the detention of 
a small number of juveniles as is the case in Bonaire. Nevertheless, the CPT considers that it is far 
preferable for juveniles to be held in specially designed detention centres, and that they should not 
be kept together with adults. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the Dutch authorities take the necessary steps to ensure 
juveniles are not held together with adults and that every effort be made to accommodate 
them in specific juvenile facilities. As long as juveniles are held in JoVo, they should not have 
to share a cell with young adults. Further, the Dutch authorities should take the necessary 
legislative measures to introduce the requirement for juveniles on Bonaire to be placed in 
special juvenile institutions.  
 
 
d. women 
 
 
35. The section for women prisoners within JICN was in the old building and consisted of a 
12 m² cell with two sets of bunk beds, cupboards, a toilet, a sink and a shower, and a well-equipped 
recreation room (table, chairs, sofa, kitchen with several appliances, washing machine and dryer). 
The cell and recreation room were freshly painted and clean and, according to the two female 
prisoners, new furniture and kitchen equipment had arrived a few days prior to the CPT’s visit. In 
spite of these measures, the cell remained dark and poorly ventilated. 
 
In principle, the cell is too small to hold more than three persons, given the CPT standard of 
a minimum of 4 m² per person of living space in multi-occupancy cells. However, the CPT noted 
that the women were generally able to spend a large part of the day outside the cell. The Director 
explained that they were aware that the cell space was insufficient, but that under the circumstances it 
was their best solution. Improved accommodation should be available in the new facility. 
 
 
36. Activities offered to female prisoners included classes for handicrafts, nail styling, skin care 
and art. Courses took place a few times a year, but often female inmates had nothing to do and 
remained in either in their cell or in the recreation room the whole day, apart from the outdoor 
exercise and gym. The women were offered cleaning jobs for a few hours a day.  
 
Women deprived of their liberty should enjoy access to meaningful activities (work, 
training, education, sport, etc.). The female prisoners at JICN should not only be offered activities 
which have been deemed "appropriate" for them (such as handicrafts and hair styling), whilst male 
prisoners are offered training of a more vocational nature. In the view of the CPT, such a 
discriminatory approach can only serve to reinforce outmoded stereotypes of the social role of 
women. 
 
 The CPT recommends that women be offered additional schooling and relevant work 
opportunities in order to prepare them for their release.
