- 26 - 
3. Health-care services 
 
 
37. At the time of the visit, the JICN medical service had three full-time nurses. An external 
general practitioner and a psychologist visited once a week and a psychiatrist once a month, and 
they were all on call for urgent matters. Agreements were in place with laboratory technicians, a 
physiotherapist, an optometrist and a dietician who visited the prison when necessary. Other 
specialist care could be obtained at the hospital. 
 
 All guards and prison officers were trained as emergency response officers 
(bedrijfshulpverleners or BHV), which included training on first aid, cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
(CPR) and the use of an automated external defibrillator (AED). 
 
 The CPT noted that the medical service was well organised and provided a good quality of 
care. Other positive findings were that the medical service was not involved in disciplinary 
procedures and basic health care was provided free of charge to all prisoners.  
 
 
38. Medical screening of newly arrived prisoners took place systematically within 24 hours of 
arrival by a nurse reporting to the doctor. The screening included an interview and physical 
examination, but no specific screening for infectious diseases and ill-treatment.  
 
The CPT recommends that systematic screening for infectious diseases and 
ill-treatment be introduced. 
 
 
39. Clear protocols and procedures were in place for a number of situations, including persons 
at risk of suicide, suspected body-packers and the monitoring and treatment of persons who were 
diabetic. There was, however, no policy on how to proceed in situations of forced medication. 
During the visit, the delegation met a prisoner with a severe mental disorder who had received 
forced medication by injection in April 2014 at JICN. He apparently needed neuroleptic medication 
but had refused to consent to this treatment for several days. Because his psychiatric condition was 
worsening, the psychiatrist decided on the forced administration of zuclopenthixol and biperiden. A 
nurse from the health-care service of JICN injected the substances following the immobilisation of 
the prisoner, which required the assistance of several prison officers.  
 
The CPT acknowledges that these situations are very difficult to handle and pragmatic 
approaches need to be developed, especially in small facilities situated far from specialised and 
better-equipped institutions. Nevertheless, the CPT recalls that forced treatment should never be 
carried out in a prison where continuous medical surveillance cannot be guaranteed.  
 
The CPT recommends that an adequately equipped room in the public hospital in 
Bonaire be made available, where such treatment and follow-up may be provided. 
 
Moreover, the Committee recommends that steps be taken to ensure that prisoners 
suffering from a serious mental disorder are not held in ordinary prisons but in specialised 
psychiatric institutions. 
 
Furthermore, the CPT recalls that, if forced treatment is deemed necessary, it should 
be surrounded by appropriate safeguards and based on clear procedures.
