- 27 - 
40. The CPT has consistently stressed that prison health-care services can make a significant 
contribution to the prevention of ill-treatment of detained persons through, inter alia, the systematic 
recording of injuries, whether vis-à-vis new arrivals or following a violent episode in prison. At 
JICN, no guidelines or procedures exist for the systematic identification of ill-treatment. 
 
The CPT recommends that measures be taken to ensure that the record drawn up 
after the medical examination of a prisoner – whether newly arrived or following a violent 
incident in prison – contains:  
 
(i) an account of statements made by the person which are relevant to the medical 
examination (including his/her description of his/her state of health and any allegations 
of ill-treatment);  
(ii) a full account of objective medical findings based on a thorough examination;  
(iii) the doctor’s observations in the light of i) and ii) indicating the consistency 
between any allegations made and the objective medical findings.  
 
Recording of the medical examination in cases of traumatic injuries should be made on 
a special form provided for this purpose, with "body charts" for marking traumatic injuries 
that will be kept in the medical file of the prisoner. If any photographs are made, they should 
be filed in the medical record of the inmate concerned. In addition, documents should be 
compiled systematically in a special trauma register where all types of injuries should be 
recorded. 
 
The results of every examination, including the above-mentioned statements and the 
doctor’s opinions/observations, should be made available to the prisoner and, with the consent 
of the prisoner, to his or her lawyer. Further, the existing procedures be reviewed in order to 
ensure that whenever injuries are recorded which are consistent with allegations of 
ill-treatment made by a prisoner (or which, even in the absence of allegations, are indicative 
of ill-treatment), the report is immediately brought to the attention of the relevant prosecutor 
regardless of the wishes of the person concerned. 
 
 
41. As regards medical confidentiality, the CPT’s delegation found that it was partially 
respected. It appeared that medical examinations generally took place out of the hearing and sight of 
custodial staff and that medical documentation was only accessible to health-care staff. However, 
prisoners requesting medical care had to submit a request form to a prison officer who passed it on 
to the medical service. Prisoners were obliged to indicate a reason for requesting medical care. 
However, no envelopes were provided, which meant that the prisoner’s medical confidentiality was 
not guaranteed.  
 
 The CPT recommends that appropriate steps be taken to ensure that prisoners are 
able to have access to the prison’s health-care service on a confidential basis, not exposing 
medical information to non-medical staff.
