- 28 - 
4. Other issues 
 
 
a. prison staff 
 
 
42. The CPT wishes to emphasise the great importance it attaches to the proper recruitment and 
training of prison staff.  
 
In 2007, JICN (then Bonaire Remand Prison) had a total of 16 staff members (including the 
Director), working in shifts of up to 5 persons. In 2010 and 2012, JICN held large-scale recruitment 
operations and, at the time of the visit, JICN had a total of 105 staff members, mostly locally 
recruited. The Director reported that a sufficient budget was guaranteed for staffing needs.  
25
A training and education policy for staff (in line with the requirements established in the 
European part of the Netherlands) was in place. This is a welcome development and the 
professionalism of staff was reflected in the relations with prisoners as observed by the delegation. 
 
 
b. contact with the outside world 
 
 
43. Prisoners at JICN have the right to receive visitors for up to 60 minutes every two weeks, 
with a maximum of 45 minutes per week and only one visit per week. Juveniles and young adults 
26
can receive visitors daily for a maximum of 45 minutes. Extra visits can be requested on the 
occasion of a prisoner’s birthday, the partner’s birthday or a visit by a family member who lives 
27
abroad. 
 
The visiting room (35 m²) was freshly painted, adequately lit and had a comfortable 
temperature. The room was under constant CCTV surveillance. There were seven booths in a row, 
with a glass separation up to face level, which restricted physical contact.  
 
Two smaller visiting rooms were available for meetings with lawyers and for special 
personal visits, on the occasion of the birth of a prisoner’s child, a seriously ill family member, or 
the departure of a close family member abroad for a long period of time. These rooms consisted of a 
28
table with two chairs and no CCTV surveillance.  
 
The CPT recalls that the policy of applying the same visiting restrictions indiscriminately to 
all prisoners is not appropriate; any restrictions must be based on an individual assessment of the 
risk which prisoners may present. Visits around a table should therefore be the rule and visits with 
partitions the exception. 
 
The CPT recommends that prisoners be granted a minimum of one visit of one hour 
per week. It further recommends that all prisoners be able to receive visits from their family 
members without physical separation, except in individual cases where there may be a clear 
security concern. 
 
 
  
                                                 
25
  Meerjarig opleidingsbeleid JICN, 20 December 2013. 
26
  Article 3.7.1 of the JICN House Rules. 
27
  Article 3.7.16 of the JICN House Rules. 
28
  Article 3.7.16 of the JICN House Rules.
