- 29 - 
44. Prisoners have a right to make phone calls at least once a week for ten minutes, which seems 
29
unduly restrictive. 
 
The CPT recommends that prisoners be granted regular and frequent access to the telephone. 
 
 
c. discipline 
 
 
45. The disciplinary procedures are clearly explained in the JICN House Rules, listing the 
sanctions of solitary confinement (maximum two weeks), restrictions on receiving visitors 
(maximum four weeks), a warning, restrictions on leave days and a fine. Review of the disciplinary 
measures showed that warnings are rarely used, while the most common disciplinary measure is 
solitary confinement in one’s own cell or in the disciplinary cell. Application of this measure did 
not appear to be excessive.  
 
JICN has four cells that can be used for solitary confinement, two in the old building and 
two in the police custody block. The cells provide acceptable conditions of detention and two 
periods of half an hour of outdoor exercise are offered each day. Medical staff visit persons in these 
cells on a daily basis. 
 
The CPT recommends that steps be taken to ensure that disciplinary punishment of 
30
prisoners does not include a total prohibition of family contacts and that any restrictions on 
family contacts as a form of punishment should be used only where the offence relates to such 
contacts. 
 
 
d. complaints and inspection procedures 
 
 
46. Prisoners can complain to the Prison Supervisory Committee, which consists of seven 
members. Each month, two members are appointed ‘commissioner of the month’, and are tasked 
with regular inspection visits to the facility and handling incoming complaints. Review of the total 
cases in 2013 showed that around 12% (13 out of 106) of the complaints were considered justified.  
  
 The procedure was generally clear and decisions were taken within a reasonable time-frame.   
 
 
47. The Law Enforcement Council (Raad voor de Rechtshandhaving) is an inter-country body 
of Curaçao, St. Maarten and the Netherlands. The Council is charged with the general inspection of 
the effectiveness and quality of several agencies and institutions of the judicial systems of Curacao, 
Sint Maarten and Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba. The Council also monitors the effectiveness and 
quality of judicial cooperation between Curacao, Sint Maarten and the Netherlands, in so far as the 
BES-Islands are concerned. It has a mandate to perform inspections but given the wide range of 
responsibilities and limited resources it does not perform regular visits to all places where persons 
may be deprived of their liberty. An inspection of JICN was carried out in August 2013, and the 
report was presented to the Ministry of Security and Justice in February 2014.   
 
                                                 
29
  Article 3.8.1 of the JICN House Rules. 
30
  See also Rule 60(4) of the European Prison Rules.
