- 32 - 
2. Ill-treatment 
 
 
49. The vast majority of the persons met by the CPT’s delegation stated that they had been 
treated correctly by the police when they had been apprehended. However, a few young persons 
interviewed at KIA alleged that they had been kicked and slapped by police officers after they had 
been handcuffed and were lying prone on the ground.  
 
The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities remind police officers, through 
training and instructions, that they should use no more force than is strictly necessary when 
carrying out an arrest. Moreover, there can be no justification for striking an apprehended 
person after he or she has been brought under control. 
 
 
3. Safeguards against ill-treatment 
 
 
a. introduction 
 
 
50. The CPT attaches particular importance to the right of persons deprived of their liberty to 
inform a close relative or another person of their choice of their situation; the right of access to a 
lawyer; and the right of access to a doctor. These rights should apply from the very outset of the 
person’s deprivation of liberty, i.e. as from the moment when the person is obliged to remain with 
the police. Persons should also be adequately informed of the possibility to avail themselves of 
these rights, and it should be possible to verify the application of these safeguards by consulting 
police custody records. 
 
 
51. The CPT has commented positively in the past on the existence of two general legal 
provisions which govern the enjoyment of rights by persons deprived of their liberty by the police, 
40
notably Article I.5-5 of the Aruban Constitution and Article 90 of the CCP. However, it had been 
critical of Police Order (Korpsorder) No 10/2004 on Arrested Persons which served as the police’s 
main reference text as regards the exercise by detainees of their fundamental rights. Therefore, the 
Committee is pleased to note that a revised Police Order on Detainees entered into force on 1 May 
2009, replacing the previous Police Order 10/2004. The new Police Order was designed to comply 
with the recommendations made by the CPT in its report on the 2007 visit. 
 
 
b. notification of custody 
 
 
52. Although no right to notify a third party of one’s detention is explicitly provided for in the 
CCP, the new Police Order on Detainees does provide for the right of every detained person to 
inform a family member or a third person of their choice as soon as possible of their arrest. The 
notification of detention is made by the duty officer, by telephone or in person, after which the 
information is recorded in the detainee database (date, time, person notified).  
 
                                                 
40
  See CPT/Inf (2008) 2, Part 2, paragraph 25.
