- 33 - 
The right of notification may be restricted only if it is in the interests of the investigation and 
only for a short time. Any decision to restrict the right to notification must be taken by an assistant 
public prosecutor (i.e. a senior police officer) or the duty public prosecutor in consultation with the 
person leading the investigation, and the reasons must be noted in the electronic custody record. 
However, Article 90 of the CCP does not provide for any time limit for the restriction on the right 
of notification.  
 
The CPT recommends that the restriction of this right should be time-limited. 
 
 
53. In contrast to the findings at the time of the 2007 visit, most persons interviewed in the 
course of the 2014 visit either at a police station or in KIA stated that they had been able to inform a 
third person of their detention. This is a positive development. Nevertheless, a number of persons, 
notably foreign nationals, alleged that they had not been able to inform a third person of their 
detention.  
 
The CPT recommends that every effort be made to ensure that all detained persons 
are able to inform a third person of their situation as from the outset of their deprivation of 
liberty. 
 
 
c. access to a lawyer 
 
 
54. As the CPT has stated in the past, its objective of guaranteeing an effective right of access to 
a lawyer during police custody is not primarily linked to issues of due process or the right to a fair 
trial; it is aimed at preventing ill-treatment. In the CPT’s experience, it is during the period 
immediately following the deprivation of liberty that the risk of intimidation and ill-treatment is at 
its greatest. 
 
It follows that to be effective as a safeguard against ill-treatment, access to a lawyer must be 
guaranteed as from the very outset of deprivation of liberty. The right of access to a lawyer must 
include the right to talk to him/her in private; the detained person should also, in principle, be 
entitled to have the lawyer present during any interview with law enforcement officials.  
 
 
55. The Aruban CCP provides that every suspect who is brought to a place for questioning 
must, immediately thereafter, and in any case before any questioning begins, be informed of his 
right to be assisted by a lawyer and, if he cannot afford a lawyer, of his right, if he is placed in 
41
custody (inverzekeringstelling), to have one provided to him free of charge. 
  
                                                 
41
  See Article 82(1c) CCP.
