- 34 - 
The CCP also provides that the lawyer has the right to unhindered access to his or her client, 
42
including consultations in private and confidential correspondence.  However, no right is granted 
for a lawyer to be present at his or her client’s interview by the police and information gathered by 
the CPT’s delegation showed that lawyers tended to be contacted only after the first police 
interview. This practice would appear to contradict the report submitted by the Aruban authorities 
to the UN Committee against Torture in 2012, in which it was stated that “a lawyer may be 
consulted even before the first police interview as a result of the Salduz judgment” of the European 
Court of Human Rights of 27 November 2008.  
 
 Further, in the course of the 2014 visit, the CPT’s delegation received a number of 
complaints from persons it interviewed that they had not been provided with prompt access to a 
lawyer.  
 
The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities ensure that all persons arrested 
have the right of access to a lawyer from the very outset of their deprivation of liberty, 
including during any police interview. Such a right should include access to an ex officio 
lawyer if required. 
 
 
56. In case of serious suspicion that the course of justice might be hindered, access to a lawyer 
43
may be restricted or denied by the prosecutor for a maximum period of eight days. The CPT 
continues to have serious reservations about this provision. The CPT fully recognises that it may 
exceptionally be necessary to delay for a certain period a detained person’s access to a lawyer of 
his/her choice. However, this should not result in the right of access to a lawyer being totally denied 
during the period in question. In such cases, access to another independent lawyer who can be 
trusted not to jeopardise the legitimate interests of the investigation should be organised. It is 
perfectly feasible to make satisfactory arrangements in advance for this type of situation, in 
consultation with the local Bar Association. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities amend the legislation accordingly 
in order to provide for right of access to another lawyer whenever access to a specific lawyer 
is restricted or denied in the interests of justice. 
 
 
d. access to a doctor 
 
 
57. According to Chapter 6, paragraph 4, of the 2009 Police Order on Detainees, every arrested 
person has a right to access to medical care. Every request for medical care should immediately be 
forwarded by the shift commander to the judicial doctor or nurse on duty and should be recorded in 
the arrested person’s file (arrestantenmodule). A detained person may also request, at his/her 
expense, to be seen by a doctor of his/her own choice. Further, the Police Order guarantees the 
medical confidentiality of any consultation and of the medical record; only the medication 
prescribed is being noted in the detainee’s file and the distribution of this medication is the 
responsibility of the shift commander. 
  
                                                 
42
  See Article 70(1) CCP. 
43
  See Article 70(2) CCP.
