- 35 - 
 In the course of the 2014 visit, the CPT’s delegation noted the situation regarding access to a 
doctor has improved since the 2007 visit. A team of two police general practitioners, a forensic 
doctor and a nurse visited the police stations on a rota basis and, outside of working hours, were on 
permanent call. However, at San Nicolas Police Station it appeared that there had been no visits by 
a doctor for many months. Some detained persons met by the delegation complained that they had 
not been able to see a doctor while being held at this police station.  
 
 The CPT recommends that police officers be reminded that every request to see a 
doctor should be promptly dealt with in accordance with the Police Order on Detainees. 
Further, the police medical team should visit all police stations in which persons may be 
detained on a regular basis.  
 
 
e. information on rights and custody records 
 
 
58. A standard notification form, available in Dutch, Papiamento, English, and Spanish, was in 
use at the police establishments visited. The form had been updated since the 2007 visit and now 
included the right of a detained person to have a third person informed of his/her detention and the 
right of access to a doctor, in addition to the right to remain silent, the right to legal counsel and the 
right to have a lawyer assigned free of charge in the event of custody (inverzekeringstelling). The 
form requires the signature of the arresting officer and the arrested person. In the event that the 
arrested person refuses to sign, the refusal is also noted on the form. 
  
It appeared that the form was being systematically used and detained persons stated that they 
had been informed of their rights. 
 
 
59. In the police stations visited, the CPT’s delegation noted that the electronic custody records 
introduced in 2009 were both comprehensive and well kept, with the relevant information inserted. 
 
 
f. investigations into complaints of police ill-treatment 
 
 
60. The CPT considers that the diligent examination by the competent authorities of all 
complaints of ill-treatment by police officers brought before them and, where evidence of 
wrongdoing emerges, the imposition of appropriate disciplinary and/or criminal penalties, will have 
a very strong deterrent effect. For this reason, the persons responsible for overseeing and carrying 
out investigations into possible ill-treatment by law enforcement officials should be independent of 
those implicated in the events. Further, such investigations should offer guarantees of effectiveness, 
promptness, expeditiousness and transparency.  
 
As was the case in 2007, two bodies were competent to carry out investigations into 
misbehaviour by members of the Police Corps of Aruba (KPA): the Landsrecherche and the Bureau 
Interne Zaken en Onderzoeken (the KPA Internal Affairs and Investigations Bureau or ‛BIZO’). 
Both could carry out investigations into criminal offences, and the BIZO could also conduct 
disciplinary investigations.
