- 36 - 
The CPT would like to receive information on the number of investigations, 
prosecutions and sanctions imposed on law enforcement officials relating to cases of ill-
treatment of detained persons for the period 2010 to 2014. Further, it understands that the 
Police Complaints Committee will be reconstituted and would like to receive information on 
its composition and mandate as well as on its institutional arrangements, (i.e. independence 
and to whom it reports). 
 
 
4. Conditions of detention 
 
 
61. The CPT considers it necessary to recall that police establishments should meet certain 
elementary material requirements. 
 
All police holding facilities should be clean, of a reasonable size for the number of persons 
they are used to accommodate, and have adequate lighting (i.e. sufficient to read by, sleeping 
periods excluded) and ventilation; preferably, such facilities should enjoy natural light. Further, 
holding facilities should be equipped with a means of rest (e.g. a fixed chair or bench) and persons 
obliged to stay overnight in custody should be provided with a clean mattress and clean blankets. 
 
Persons in custody should be allowed to comply with the needs of nature in clean and decent 
conditions, and be offered adequate washing facilities. They should have ready access to drinking 
water and be given food at appropriate times, including at least one full meal (i.e. something more 
substantial than a sandwich) every day. Persons held for 24 hours or more should be provided with 
appropriate personal hygiene items and be offered outdoor exercise every day. 
 
 
62. In the course of the 2014 visit, the CPT’s delegation visited the police stations of Noord, 
Santa Cruz and San Nicolas. The police station with the largest detention area, Oranjestad, was 
temporarily closed at the time of the visit due to the building of a tramline. Nevertheless, prior to its 
44
closure the CPT had received reports that the material conditions in the detention area continued 
to be poor despite some renovation work having been carried out in 2010. 
 
 The CPT would like to be informed when the detention cells in Oranjestad Police 
Station are brought back into service. Further, it would like to receive details of the conditions 
of detention (inter alia access to natural light and ventilation, the functioning of the sanitary 
facilities and hygiene, and access to outdoor exercise). 
 
 
63. The conditions of detention at Noord Police Station had hardly improved since the 2007 
45
visit. The cells had no access to natural light and limited ventilation, and the artificial neon 
lighting in the corridor outside the cells was poor. Worn and dirty mattresses and paper-like sheets 
(when in stock) were provided at night, and drinking water was provided sporadically by staff 
during the day; the water in the cells was switched on at 6 a.m. and 8 p.m. for a few minutes to 
enable detained persons to wash. The intercom system did not function in any of the cells. Access to 
outdoor exercise was offered for at least one hour every day except Saturdays (due to a lack of 
staff). Otherwise, detained persons were confined to their 5 m² cells for periods of up to 10 days 
with nothing to do. At the time of the visit, 11 persons were being held at the police station, many 
of whom were being held for the full 10 days.   
                                                 
44
  See for example the January 2013 monitoring report on the implementation of CPT recommendations in Aruba 
– op.cit 1. 
45
  See CPT/Inf (2008) 2, Part 2, paragraph 19.
