- 37 - 
 
 The detention facility at Santa Cruz Police Station, built in 2005, consisted of two corridors 
each with six cells; it had been freshly painted and was in a good state of repair. Each cell contained 
a concrete plinth and measured 7 m², including the partitioned toilet and shower (the water was 
switched on for 30 minutes twice a day). However, access to natural light was very limited and 
ventilation was extremely poor; at the time of the visit (7 p.m.), the temperature in the cells was 
31°Celsius. Further, the mattresses in the two occupied cells were worn and thin.  
 
 The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities take the necessary steps to improve 
the conditions of detention at Noord and Santa Cruz Police Stations, notably as regards access 
to natural light and ventilation; mattresses should be cleaned and sheets systematically 
provided. Further, all detained persons held for 24 hours or more should be offered access to 
outdoor exercise every day.  
 
 
64. At the outset of the visit, the CPT had been informed that the detention facility at San 
Nicolas Police Station was only being used to hold persons for a few hours. When the CPT’s 
delegation visited the facility the police officer on duty stated that detained persons were never held 
for more than one night in the station. This was plainly incorrect as the delegation met a number of 
46
persons who had been held in the detention facility at San Nicolas for extensive periods. The 
conditions in the seven-bed cell for women (measuring some 28 m²) and the 12 single-occupancy 
cells (each measuring 7 m²) were not acceptable; they had limited access to natural light, inadequate 
ventilation and artificial lighting and were in a poor state of repair. Two of the single-occupancy 
cells were used for cases of alcohol/drug withdrawal and possessed solid doors which meant that 
the air was even more stagnant and that access to natural light was non-existent. Above all, there 
was a rank, fetid smell emanating from the cells as the toilets did not flush properly. Detained 
persons who spent several days in these cells stated that when the toilets were flushed from outside 
the cell, the water would instead rise up over the toilet bowl and flood the floor with faeces and 
urine. Moreover, detained persons were frequently not provided with any outdoor exercise. 
 
 These conditions are clearly not suitable for holding detained persons. And yet, the CPT’s 
delegation met a 15 year-old boy who had been detained from 26 April to 6 May 2014 in this police 
station. For the first four days of his detention, he was not provided with a mattress, blanket or any 
47
hygiene products; nor was he offered any access to outdoor exercise. He was effectively kept in 
solitary confinement for ten days with no support. Such treatment could be considered as inhuman 
and degrading.  
 
 The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities take out of service the detention 
cells at San Nicolas Police Station until such time as they have been fully refurbished and the 
sewage problems resolved properly. Under no circumstances should a detained person be held 
overnight at this police station.  
 
Further, whenever it is considered necessary to deprive a juvenile of his/her liberty, he 
or she must be held in an appropriate place of detention commensurate with their needs and 
provided with care and support by properly trained child specialists. Juveniles should not be 
held in police stations overnight. 
 
 
                                                 
46
  For example, SR was held from 1 to 9 May and WL from 2 to 9 May 2014. 
47
  They were provided by his mother after four days.
