- 38 - 
65. As regards persons held in a police station who are deemed to be at risk of suicide, an 
appropriate care protocol should be applied. Where possible, the person should be placed in a cell 
which has no ligature points and provided with rip-proof clothing. Further, the person should be 
placed under constant personal observation and provided with the opportunity to talk to a health-
care professional. It is totally inappropriate to place a detained person at risk of suicide naked in a 
cell with no support; the CPT’s delegation met a man who was kept naked for 10 days in a cell at 
Santa Cruz Police Station because he was deemed to be at risk of suicide. In the CPT’s view, such 
treatment could be considered as degrading and should be ended. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities draw up a care protocol for all 
detained persons who are deemed to be at risk of suicide while in police custody, taking into 
account the above remarks. 
 
 
66. The CPT has consistently raised the issue of lengthy detention in police premises in its visit 
48
reports dating back to 1994. In its report on the 2007 visit, the CPT revisited this matter, 
criticising the fact that it was standard practice to hold detained persons, including minors, on police 
premises for 10 days, irrespective of the complexity of the case, with no requirement to justify, in 
49
each individual case, the need for longer placement in police custody. At the time of the 2014 
visit, the situation had not changed and detained persons continued to be routinely held for up to 10 
days in police cells. The CPT therefore reiterates its view that remand custody on police premises in 
itself poses a series of risks of ill-treatment. Consequently, instead of being kept for longer than two 
days and 16 hours in police stations, persons remanded in custody should be promptly transferred to 
prison; such an approach does not preclude the police from carrying out further questioning, if 
necessary, of persons remanded in prison.  
 
 Moreover, the conditions of detention in the police stations visited are only suitable for 
holding detained persons for short periods, and certainly not longer than 64 hours.  
 
 The CPT calls upon the Aruban authorities to review the system of remand detention 
on police premises with a view to substantially reducing its duration, in light of the above 
remarks. 
 
 
  
                                                 
48
  See CPT/Inf (96) 27, paragraphs 187 to 190. 
49
  See CPT/Inf (2008) 2, Part 2, paragraph 14.
