- 39 - 
B. Centro Dakota Immigration Detention Facility 
 
 
67. In the course of the 2014 visit, the delegation carried out a targeted visit to the Centro Dakota 
immigration detention facility. Foreign nationals held under aliens legislation have been detained at 
this facility since February 2013. Immigration detention on Aruba falls under the responsibility of 
50
the Aruban Police Force and is run by its Department for Supervision of Foreigners. At the time 
of the visit, four foreign nationals were being held at the facility; three men and one woman.  
 
 The majority of persons who have been ordered to leave or who are awaiting a decision on 
their appeal to an expulsion order are placed under an obligation to report to the police at regular 
intervals. Detention, however, still occurs frequently. In the first four months of 2014, a total of 78 
persons had been detained at Centro Dakota; 55 men and 23 women. The great majority of persons 
spent one to three days, while the maximum varied between 15 and 18 days. One person, however, 
had been detained for 57 days. 
 
 
68. At the time of the visit, immigration detention was regulated in the National Ordinance on 
Admission, Expulsion and Departure of 1993. According to Article 19(1) of this Ordinance, foreign 
nationals may be removed from Aruba if they entered the country illegally or overstayed the 
duration of their visa or permit. Article 19(2) provides that such a person may be detained if the 
Minister of Justice considers him or her to be a danger to public order and safety or good morals, or 
if there is a well-founded fear the person will attempt to evade expulsion. Article 19(3) stipulates 
that such a decision must be reasoned and provided in writing to the person concerned.  
 
 However, there were no specific regulations governing the detention of irregular migrants. 
While a right to appeal expulsion and detention orders is not provided in law, a right to appeal such 
a decision within six weeks is incorporated into the written orders. Immigrants who are being 
detained are free to consult a lawyer, but there are no legal aid provisions guaranteeing a right to a 
lawyer if one cannot be afforded.  
 
 The CPT’s delegation was informed that amendments to the National Ordinance were being 
drawn up which would introduce a 90-day maximum period of detention and included judicial 
review of detention orders within 72 hours. A right to legal aid and a right to appeal appear not to 
be envisioned in these amendments. 
 
 The delegation was also provided with a draft national decree regulating the regime of 
immigration detention, as well as with draft house rules based on the proposed decree. The 
delegation observed that the facility generally functioned in line with these documents, although 
they had not yet been formally adopted.  
 
 The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities move forward urgently with 
developing and adopting appropriate regulations for the detention of irregular migrants. 
Such regulations should include the right to legal assistance, provided free of charge for 
persons without sufficient means, and the right of appeal. 
 
 
                                                 
50
  This function was placed under the Aruban Police Force on 1 March 2012, changing the name from Guarda 
Nos Costa (border guards) into Afdeling Vreemdelingentoezicht.
