- 40 - 
69. The CPT’s delegation heard no allegations of ill-treatment by the supervisory staff of Centro 
Dakota and the atmosphere at the facility was relaxed.  
 
 
70. The staff of centres for immigration detainees have a particularly onerous task. Firstly, there 
will inevitably be communication difficulties caused by language barriers. Secondly, many detained 
persons will find the fact that they have been deprived of their liberty when they are not suspected 
of any criminal offence difficult to accept. Thirdly, there is a risk of tension between detainees of 
different nationalities or ethnic groups. Consequently, the CPT places a premium upon the 
supervisory staff in such centres being carefully selected and receiving appropriate training. Staff 
should possess both well-developed qualities in the field of interpersonal communication and 
cultural sensitivity, given the diverse backgrounds of the detainees. Further, at least some of them 
should have relevant language skills. Further, they should be taught to recognise possible symptoms 
of stress reactions displayed by detained persons and to take appropriate action. 
 
 While staff at Centro Dakota generally acted in a supportive manner, they had not received 
specific training to deal with the particular needs of foreign nationals detained under aliens 
legislation and played a merely supervisory role.  
 
 The CPT recommends that staff be selected and trained for the specific purpose of 
51
working with irregular migrants. 
 
 
71. Following the renovations that took place early 2014, the material conditions can generally be 
52
considered adequate. The one storey building consisted of 16 single-occupancy cells measuring 
around 9 m², equipped with a regular bed with a proper mattress and a semi-partitioned sanitary 
annex; access to natural light was sufficient and ventilation and artificial lighting adequate. There 
were no call-bells.  
 
 
72. No purposeful activities were offered. Detainees had access to a common recreation room (65 
m²), which was equipped with tables and chairs, a television, cards and board games, for most of the 
day . Access to outdoor exercise was offered twice a day for one hour, in a long and narrow space 
adjoining the building which provided no shelter from the sun or rain; the uneven gravel surface, 
combined with the layout of the yard meant that detainees could not undertake any sports activities. 
  
 For short stays, which is the case for the vast majority of persons held at Centro Dakota, the 
regime could be considered as acceptable. However, in respect of persons who have to stay for 
more than a few days, additional measures need to be taken to offer some purposeful activities 
(educational, recreational or vocational).  
 
 The CPT recommends that the exercise yard be improved in the light of above remarks. 
The CPT further recommends that the Aruban authorities develop a range of purposeful 
activities for detained persons at Centro Dakota. The longer the period for which persons are 
detained, the more developed should be the activities which are offered to them.  
 
 
                                                 
51
  See also the report on the 2007 visit (CPT/Inf (2008) 2), Part 3, paragraph 34). 
52
  One of these cells was generally only used as a storage room.
