- 41 - 
73. The persons interviewed indicated that they had not undergone any medical screening upon 
admission. When a detainee is in need of medical care, he or she is first visited by the police nurse. 
If necessary a doctor can be called in, or the detainee is transferred to the hospital.  
 
 The CPT recommends that systematic medical screening of all immigration detainees, 
including for transmissible diseases, be introduced. Such screening should be carried out in a 
way that respects medical confidentiality. 
 
 
74. The arrangements for allowing foreign nationals contact with the outside world were generally 
adequate. They were allowed to receive visitors on a daily basis and were allowed to make and 
receive phone calls throughout the day. However, the draft House Rules provided that the maximum 
duration of visits will be 15 minutes; the CPT does not see any justification for such a time-limit 
and would propose that visits be one hour or longer in duration.  
 
 The CPT recommends that this provision in the draft House Rules be amended 
accordingly.  
 
 
75. As for information in a language detainees understand, the delegation noted that most staff 
members could communicate in Spanish (the language of the majority of immigration detainees in 
Aruba). However, communication problems can arise when other languages are needed. The 
delegation found that the draft House Rules had been translated into English and Spanish, but legal 
documents pertaining to individual detainees, such as their detention and deportation orders, are 
only available in Dutch. Staff made an effort to orally translate and explain these documents, but 
persons interviewed by the delegation indicated that they had refused to sign them, as they were not 
able to read them themselves.  
 
The CPT recommends that all immigration detainees be expressly informed of their 
rights and the procedures applicable to them in a language they can understand. All 
immigration detainees should be systematically provided with a document setting out this 
information; the document should be available in the languages most commonly spoken by 
those concerned and, if necessary, the services of an interpreter should be made available. 
Further, all official documents that immigration detainees are required to sign should be 
provided in a language they can understand.
