- 42 - 
C. Aruba Correctional Institution (KIA) 
 
 
1. Preliminary remarks 
 
 
76. The Korrektie Instituut Aruba (or ‛KIA’) remains the only prison in Aruba, situated in an 
isolated location to the south-east of the island, and has been operational since 1990. At the time of 
the visit, it was accommodating 212 prisoners for an official capacity of 310 places.  
 
The prison consisted of seven distinct units. The vast majority of prisoners (165) were held 
in the remand (Huis van Bewaring or HvB) and sentenced (Straf) sections of the prison, each of 
which consisted of four wings leading off a central gallery. Female prisoners and young persons 
were held in distinct units separated from the rest of the prison population. In addition, there were 
units for specific categories of prisoner: a high-security unit (Extra Beveiligde Afdeling or EBA), a 
protection unit (Hechtenis) and a unit for prisoners with mental health problems (Individuele 
Begeleidingsafdeling or IBA). 
 
 
2. Ill-treatment 
 
 
77. The great majority of the prisoners met by the CPT’s delegation stated that they had no 
problems with the prison staff. However, a few allegations of deliberate ill-treatment of inmates by 
prison officers were received. One prisoner, who regularly had verbal altercations with prison staff, 
stated that he had been punched by a prison officer while returning from a visit with his hands 
handcuffed behind his back. Another prisoner alleged that in March 2014 a group of police officers 
had come to his cell, handcuffed and blind-folded him and delivered punches and kicks to his body 
and head. Apparently the injuries were noted and photographed by a doctor and the case is currently 
being investigated by the Landsrecherche.  
 
A number of prisoners also alleged that they had been verbally abused by prison officers, 
notably those accommodated in wing A1. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities deliver the clear message to prison 
officers that all forms of ill-treatment, including verbal abuse, are not acceptable and will be 
the subject of sanctions. Further, the Committee would like to be informed of the outcome of 
the investigation by the Landsrecherche into the above-mentioned case. 
 
 
78. Many prisoners told the CPT’s delegation that they did not feel safe in KIA and several 
allegations of inter-prisoner violence and intimidation were received. In particular, inmates stated 
that prison officers were either not aware or insufficiently attentive to the possibility of prisoners 
from one wing being able to mix with prisoners from another wing when the gates leading on to the 
central gallery in either the remand (HvB) or sentenced (Straf) sections were opened. Moreover, a 
few inmates alleged that staff were slow to intervene when a fight among inmates broke out and in 
some areas such as the gym in Straf there was no prison officer on duty to supervise the inmates.
