- 43 - 
 Addressing the phenomenon of inter-prisoner violence and intimidation requires that prison 
staff be alert to signs of trouble and both resolved and properly trained to intervene when necessary. 
The existence of positive relations between staff and prisoners, based on the notions of dynamic 
security and care, is a decisive factor in this context; this will depend in large measure on staff 
possessing appropriate interpersonal communication skills. It is also obvious that an effective 
strategy to tackle inter-prisoner intimidation/violence should seek to ensure that prison staff are 
placed in a position to exercise their authority in an appropriate manner. Consequently, the level of 
staffing must be sufficient (including at night-time) to enable prison officers to supervise adequately 
the activities of prisoners and support each other effectively in the exercise of their tasks. Both 
initial and ongoing training programmes for staff of all grades must address the issue of managing 
inter-prisoner violence. 
 
 In addition, a key component in the management of inter-prisoner relations is the careful 
assessment, classification and cell allocation of individual prisoners within the prison population.  
 
 The CPT reiterates its recommendation that the prison management of KIA develop a 
strategy to address the challenge of inter-prisoner violence, taking into account the above 
remarks. 
 
 
3. Conditions of detention 
 
 
a. material conditions 
 
 
79. At the time of the 2014 visit, the material conditions in much of the prison were in an 
advanced state of dilapidation. This was particularly the case in the HvB and Straf sections, where 
lumps of concrete and plaster were falling off the ceilings and the walls were being eroded by the 
wind, sand and salt. The state of decay was evident in all the cells visited and in many parts of the 
buildings the iron support rods were exposed. A piece of plaster had recently fallen on an inmate 
walking up the steps to the central gallery of the sentenced section, highlighting the dangerous 
nature of the situation. The delegation also noted flooding in many cells, either with leaking toilets 
or water running down the walls of the cells, which represents a safety, and even a health, hazard 
(inmates and staff slipping on the floors and mosquitoes breeding).  
 
2 
The cells in the HvB and Straf sections measured approximately 9.5 m and were equipped 
with a triple bunk bed plus mattress and blankets, chairs, table and cupboard. The sanitary annexes 
contained a combined WC/shower unit and a washbasin, and were partially partitioned from the rest 
of the cell. Access to natural light was good. However, the artificial lighting in many cells did not 
work which meant that from 6 p.m. until dawn it was dark. Further, many cells were very dusty as 
there was no means of preventing sand being blown into the cells.  
 
As the CPT has stated in the past, the size of the cells were entirely satisfactory for 
accommodating one person and could, on an exceptional basis, be considered acceptable for two 
(subject to the qualification that the sanitary annexe should be fully partitioned). However, they 
provided a very confined living space for three prisoners which was the situation found in many 
cells.
