- 44 - 
The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities take the necessary steps to redress 
the state of decay and dilapidation in the prison, including preventing further flooding. 
Further, the number of inmates accommodated in each cell should not exceed two. In 
addition, measures should be taken to provide artificial lighting in every cell and to fully 
partition the sanitary annexe in each cell. 
 
 
b. regime 
 
 
80. The CPT recalls that the aim should be to ensure that all prisoners, including those on 
remand, spend a reasonable part of the day (i.e. eight hours or more) outside their cells, engaged in 
purposeful activities of a varied nature: work, preferably with vocational value; education; sport; 
recreation/association. A regime which provides for varied activities, as part of an individualised 
sentence plan, is essential for the welfare of prisoners during their incarceration as well as being a 
vital component in the preparation for release. 
 
 At the time of the 2014 visit, the CPT’s delegation found that the amount of purposeful 
activities available was totally insufficient. Prisoners spent most of their days in idleness and there 
was a genuine frustration at the lack of opportunities for work, vocational programmes, sports and 
recreation. Certain initiatives that had been started, such as music classes, suddenly stopped. 
Education was virtually non-existent and those few committed prisoners who studied on their own 
for exams were informed at the last moment without any clear explanation that they could not sit 
the exams. 
 
The CPT reiterates its recommendation that activities for prisoners be developed, with 
a view to ensuring that all prisoners (including those on remand) can spend a reasonable part 
of the day (i.e. 8 hours or more) outside their cells engaged in purposeful activities of a varied 
nature: work, preferably with vocational value; education; sport; recreation/association. 
 
 
c. juveniles 
 
 
81. The dedicated juvenile unit contained twelve cells (each measuring some 12 m² including a 
partially partitioned sanitary annexe) on two levels, opposite which was a control room where staff 
were stationed. A separate recreation room for drawing and handicraft classes adjoined the cell 
block area but appeared to be under-utilised. The front of each cell had floor-to-ceiling bars, thus 
affording little privacy. At the time of the visit, there were 21 juveniles and young adults in the unit 
ranging from 15 to 21 years of age. All the cells possessed a triple bunk bed and were satisfactorily 
equipped. However, the layout of the cage-like cells was not conducive to developing a supportive 
environment to assist their educational development and the enhancement of their social skills.  
 
 The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities take the necessary steps to create 
an environment more appropriate for accommodating juveniles deprived of their liberty. 
Further, no more than two juveniles should be accommodated in each cell and juveniles 
should not have to share a cell with young adults.
