- 45 - 
82. As regards the regime, the juveniles were offered one and a half hours of outdoor exercise 
every day and one and a half hours outside the cell in the hall area in front of the cells where they 
could use the fitness equipment. Complaints were heard from many of the young persons about the 
lack of activities on offer, notably the lack of education and vocational activities. Although the 
regime was complicated by the fact that there were three distinct groups of young persons in the 
unit who had to be kept separated due to outside rivalries, there were nevertheless far too few 
opportunities for young inmates to engage in purposeful activities. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities ensure that all juveniles held at 
KIA (whether on remand or sentenced) are provided with a full programme of vocational, 
educational, sports and recreational activities. 
 
 
83. One of the cardinal principles enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of 
53 54
the Child and in the European Rules for juvenile offenders is that juveniles should only be 
deprived of their liberty as a last resort and for the shortest possible period of time and that in all 
55
action concerning them, their best interests shall be a primary consideration.  
 
 At the time of the visit, the CPT’s delegation met a 15-year-old boy in the unit. The boy was 
kept apart from the other young prisoners by being placed in a separate cell and conducting his 
outdoor exercise alone. Nevertheless, he associated with the older youths on the wing and was not 
offered any specific activities. 
 
 In the CPT’s view, KIA was not a suitable place to accommodate a 15-year-old-boy 
and consideration should be given to providing a more child-centred environment for 
juveniles who must be deprived of their liberty. To this end, the CPT recommends that the 
authorities of Aruba develop a strategy for addressing the specific needs of juveniles deprived 
of their liberty. Moreover, the new Criminal Code provides for sentenced juveniles to be 
placed in a youth institution (Plaatsing in een inrichting voor jeugdigen). As long as juveniles 
are kept in KIA, additional efforts must be made to provide them with a full range of 
purposeful activities and socio-educative support. 
 
 
d. women prisoners 
 
 
84. The layout of the female unit was the same as that of the juvenile unit and was 
accommodating 10 women at the time of the visit. All the cells were clean, freshly painted and 
suitably equipped. However, the sanitary annexes were not fully partitioned and the toilets in 
several of the cells did not flush. Further, there were no call-bells and prisoners claimed that staff 
sometimes left the unit unattended. These deficiencies should be remedied.  
 
  
                                                 
53
  Articles 3 and 37.b of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. 
54
  Rules 5 and 10 of the European Rules for juvenile offenders subject to sanctions or measures 
(Recommendation CM/Rec(2008)11). 
55
  See General Comment No. 14 (2013) on the right of the child to have his or her best interests taken as a 
primary consideration (Article 3, paragraph 1) by the Committee on the Rights of the Child. See also the 1985 
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (“Beijing Rules”), the 
1990 United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (“Havana Rules”) and the 
1990 United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency (“Riyadh Guidelines”).
