- 46 - 
As regards the regime, female prisoners were offered an hour and fifteen minutes of outdoor 
exercise each day, and spent most of the day associating in the hall area in front of the cells where 
they could use the fitness equipment, and have access to a kitchen. However, the prisoners 
complained about the lack of purposeful activities (vocational and educational), and that most of the 
scheduled activities in the daily programme had been stopped. They also complained about the lack 
of psychological support and inadequate preparation for release.  
 
The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities take the necessary steps to offer 
women prisoners a full range of purposeful activities, in line with the scheduled programme. 
Further, they should be offered the necessary support in preparation for their release. 
 
 
e. Vulnerable persons’ unit (IBA) 
 
 
85. The CPT wishes to highlight in particular the poor conditions in the IBA section where 
prisoners with mental health problems and other vulnerable prisoners were accommodated. The 
nine cells were dilapidated, dirty and had very little access to natural light. Moreover, the prisoners 
in this section should be provided with care appropriate to their condition; instead, they were left to 
idle away their days with little to do and minimal psychiatric/psychological input. For example, a 
prisoner diagnosed with schizophrenia, who had already spent six years in the prison and had 
another seven years to serve, spent his time cleaning and watching television and had no sentence or 
treatment plan to assist him in coping with prison and preparing for life in the community. Such 
treatment is not conducive to the well-being of these prisoners. 
 
 The CPT recommends that immediate steps be taken to improve the situation in the 
IBA, in the light of the above remarks, or that the IBA prisoners be transferred to alternative 
accommodation where their specific needs can be better met. 
 
 
4. Prison staff 
 
 
86. The situation regarding the number of prison officers working at KIA has not improved 
since the 2007 visit. At the time of the 2014 visit, there were 99 prison officers of whom 16 had 
recently completed their initial training, for an official complement of 111 officers. The staffing 
roster required 53 officers for each period of 24 hours, with 31 officers present between 10 a.m. and 
3 p.m. and 11 officers on duty from 11 p.m. to 7 a.m. However, levels of absenteeism remained 
high at 45 days per year per staff member in 2013 (a reduction from 56 in 2012) which further 
fuelled the levels of stress and the excessive overtime. It was not unusual for officers regularly to 
work 16-hour shifts. This state of affairs increases the high levels of stress and exacerbates the 
tension inherent in any prison environment; the layout of the accommodation blocks did not 
facilitate matters. Further, the low staffing complement has a negative influence on the quality and 
level of the activities programme. Not surprisingly, the delegation observed that little was done to 
promote positive relations between staff and prisoners.
