- 47 - 
It is essential that the excessive amount of overtime worked by some staff is reduced and 
that the rates of absenteeism among staff are tackled. This will require inter alia recruiting more 
staff and addressing staff management issues, such as ensuring that the promotion system is more 
meritocratic. The delegation met some very committed staff of different ranks who would like to 
see the prison evolve, and putting in place a staff development programme would contribute to the 
professionalisation of staff and assist towards creating the possibility of a rehabilitative regime in 
prison.  
 
Professionalisation of staff should see the role of a prison officer evolving from that of 
essentially a “turn-key” with no responsibility other than that of static security. Instead, prison 
officers should be encouraged to extend their role into interacting positively with inmates, taking 
part in rehabilitation programmes and being an integral element in a multi-disciplinary approach 
towards prisoners’ welfare. This would not only provide a far more challenging and interesting job 
for the prison officers but it would also address the rehabilitation aspect of prison which has to date 
been moribund. Of course, this would necessitate introducing far more training for those prison 
officers capable and willing to take up this additional role. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities take the necessary measures to 
increase the number of prison officers employed as well as to develop the capacity and role of 
prison officers, in the light of the above remarks. In parallel, the amounts of overtime should 
be reduced and the levels of, and reasons for, absenteeism tackled. 
 
 
87. More generally, it is important that prison officers be provided with regular in-service 
training courses to improve their skills and knowledge, and also refresher courses. For example, 
some officers told the delegation that they had not had refresher firearms training for seven years; if 
true, these officers should not be permitted to carry firearms, for example when carrying out escort 
duties.  
 
The CPT recommends that all prison officers be offered in-service training and that 
regular compulsory refresher courses be organised for core requirements of a prison officer’s 
job. 
 
 
88. In December 2013, prison officers staged a walk-out without providing any prior notice 
following months of disgruntlement over prison staff management. Taking advantage of the lack of 
prison officers present, some inmates of the HvB section rioted while others had to escape from 
their smoke-filled cells; order was only restored after the police intervened.  
 
Although strikes are not common, it is essential that every step be taken to ensure that 
prisoners’ rights are upheld and that their physical and psychological integrity is guaranteed 
whenever there is a strike by prison staff. In particular, prisoners should be offered at least one hour 
of outdoor exercise, access to medical care, regular meals and access to a shower as well as 
continued contacts with the outside world (especially visits, including by a lawyer). To this end, a 
binding agreement should be drawn up to ensure that there are sufficient staffing levels in the prison 
during a strike action to assure such a minimum service. 
 
The Committee recommends that the Aruban authorities establish a protocol for a 
guaranteed minimum service for inmates, applicable whenever there is a strike by prison 
staff, taking into account the above remarks.
