- 48 - 
5. Health-care services 
 
 
89. The CPT recalls that the task of prison health-care services should not be limited to treating 
sick prisoners. They should also be entrusted with responsibility for social and preventive medicine. 
In particular, a prison health-care service should ensure that information about transmissible 
diseases is regularly circulated, to both prisoners and prison staff. Suicide prevention is another 
matter falling within the purview of a prison’s health-care service. Further, it lies with prison 
health-care services to supervise catering arrangements (quantity, quality, preparation and 
distribution of food) and conditions of hygiene. Provision of medical, nursing and technical staff, as 
well as premises, installations and equipment, should be geared accordingly. 
 
 The findings of the 2014 visit demonstrate that there remain a number of important 
structural deficiencies in the provision of health care to prisoners. 
 
 
a. health-care staffing and premises 
 
 
90. At the time of the visit, there was one full-time general practitioner and three full-time 
nurses, all of whom were present in the establishment from 8 a.m. to 4.30 p.m. five days a week. 
Outside of these hours, the doctor and nurses were on call. In addition, there was a full-time 
psychologist, and a dentist was supposed to start working at the beginning of June 2014. For a 
prison with a capacity of some 300 inmates, the health-care staffing complement could be increased 
by an additional one or two nurses, preferably one of whom should be a qualified mental health 
nurse. 
 
 Prisoners in need of psychiatric care would be sent to the psychiatric department at the 
Aruba General Hospital (or ‘PAAZ’) in Oranjestad. However, this department was not equipped to 
accommodate forensic patients who were considered violent or dangerous, which meant that 
consultations at PAAZ lasted only a few hours. Further, prisoners were often hand and leg cuffed 
during consultation at PAAZ; such a routine practice should be ended as it undermines the 
establishment of a proper patient-doctor relationship. Instead, cuffs should only be applied at the 
express request of the treating doctor. In the absence of a forensic psychiatric department in Aruba 
and the fact that the KIA has a special unit for prisoners with mental health problems, provision 
should be made for a psychiatrist to visit KIA one or two days a week. Further, an occupational 
therapist should also visit the establishment to ensure that prisoners located in the IBA are offered 
appropriate programmes. 
 
As for access to other medical specialists, there was usually a considerable delay due to the 
financial constraints placed on KIA. External scheduled appointments were frequently cancelled at 
the last moment because the establishment did not have the money to pay the specialists, who 
required payment in cash. Cancelled appointments often resulted in a delay in treatment of up to 
three months due to rescheduling. It should also be mentioned that laboratory testing was regularly 
interrupted for up to several weeks at a time due to non-payment. 
 
 The CPT recommends that a mental health nurse be recruited at KIA and that 
provision be made for a psychiatrist and occupational therapist to visit the prison at least one 
day every week. It would like to be informed whether a dentist is now visiting KIA.
