- 49 - 
 Further, the CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities take the necessary steps to 
ensure that KIA possesses the appropriate financial resources to pay for specialist medical 
care that prisoners require and for laboratory testing. In this connection, consideration might 
be given to developing a closer partnership with the Ministry of Health, with a view to 
improving quality control and access to health care. 
 
 
91. Access to health care within the prison was also problematic due to the current “requests” 
procedures in place in the prison. It appeared that prisoners had to place all requests into a box and 
certain prison officers were responsible for making a triage of the various requests and deciding on 
which ones were designated as “health” requests. The health requests were subsequently handed 
over to the medical service, sometimes weeks after the original request had been filed.  
 
 The CPT recommends that the prison authorities review the current requests 
procedures to ensure that all requests to see a doctor or nurse are directly transmitted to the 
health-care service without interference by prison staff. 
 
Further, the CPT has reservations about the utility of the prison doctor spending 
considerable amounts of time drawing up dietary plans for every prisoner. It would be preferable if 
his time was devoted to clinical care and the organisation of the medical service and, apart from 
drawing up a general dietary plan, should only exceptionally make a dietary recommendation for 
those inmates requiring a special dietary menu due to medical needs (such as diabetes).  
 
The CPT recommends that the involvement of the prison doctor in drawing up dietary 
plans for prisoners be reviewed, in the light of the above remarks. 
 
 
92. The premises of the health-care unit were insufficient to meet its needs. The consultation 
rooms were small and poorly ventilated; the inability to open the windows and aerate the rooms 
after consultations represents a clear health risk. Further, water was leaking through the ceiling into 
the doctor’s consultation room. Moreover, the health-care unit had only one entry and exit, making 
the building a fire-safety hazard (the windows were all barred and could not be opened), which was 
a cause of constant concern for the staff.  
 
 The CPT recommends that steps be taken to remedy the above-mentioned deficiencies 
with a view to ensuring that the health-care services are located in premises fit for purpose. 
 
 
b. medical screening, recording of injuries and confidentiality 
 
 
93. The CPT is obliged to reiterate the importance of medical screening of newly arrived 
prisoners, in particular in the interests of identifying special medical needs, preventing the spread of 
transmissible diseases, suicide prevention and the timely recording of any injuries. Such screening 
should be carried out as soon as possible and no later than 24 hours after a prisoner’s admission to 
the establishment.
