- 50 - 
94. Newly admitted prisoners (roughly 23 every week) were usually seen by a nurse within 24 
hours of arrival. However, the actual medical assessment carried out was extremely cursory. No 
physical examination was performed and there was no screening for infectious diseases, mental 
health problems or addictions. Nor was an anamnesis performed. For example, a prisoner who was 
sent to hospital from a police station with suspected tuberculosis on 29 April 2014 and a week later 
admitted to KIA had no information in his medical file, not even a completed intake form at the 
time of the visit on 20 May 2014. 
 
The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities take steps to ensure that every 
newly arrived prisoner be properly interviewed and physically examined by a medical doctor, 
or a fully qualified nurse reporting to a doctor, during the initial screening. Such screening 
should always take place within 24 hours of a person’s admission to prison, and preferably on 
the day of arrival at the establishment. Further, each prison health-care service should have 
in place a screening tool to enable a proper assessment of the health-care needs of each newly 
admitted prisoner. 
 
 
95. The CPT has consistently pointed out that prison health-care services can make a significant 
contribution to the prevention of ill-treatment of detained persons through, inter alia, the systematic 
recording of injuries, whether vis-à-vis new arrivals or following a violent episode in prison. Not 
only is it necessary for the health-care services at KIA to record injuries observed in sufficient detail 
but the doctor should note down a full account of the statements made by the person concerned 
which are relevant to the medical examination. Further, a doctor should indicate as far as possible 
the consistency between any allegations made and the objective medical findings; this will enable 
the relevant authorities to properly assess the information set out in the record. Such an approach 
was not being followed at KIA. Further, it is essential that all such reports are transmitted to the 
relevant authorities. 
 
The CPT recommends that measures be taken to ensure that the record drawn up 
after the medical examination of a prisoner – whether newly arrived or following a violent 
incident in prison – contains:  
 
(i) an account of statements made by the person which are relevant to the medical 
examination (including his/her description of his/her state of health and any allegations 
of ill-treatment);  
(ii) a full account of objective medical findings based on a thorough examination;  
(iii) the doctor’s observations in the light of i) and ii) indicating the consistency 
between any allegations made and the objective medical findings.  
 
Recording of the medical examination in cases of traumatic injuries should be made on 
a special form provided for this purpose, with "body charts" for marking traumatic injuries 
that will be kept in the medical file of the prisoner. If any photographs are made, they should 
be filed in the medical record of the inmate concerned. In addition, documents should be 
compiled systematically in a special trauma register where all types of injuries should be 
recorded.
