- 51 - 
The results of every examination, including the above-mentioned statements and the 
doctor’s opinions/observations, should be made available to the prisoner and, with the consent 
of the prisoner, to his or her lawyer. Further, the existing procedures be reviewed in order to 
ensure that whenever injuries are recorded which are consistent with allegations of 
ill-treatment made by a prisoner (or which, even in the absence of allegations, are indicative 
of ill-treatment), the report is immediately brought to the attention of the relevant prosecutor 
regardless of the wishes of the person concerned. 
 
 
96. As regards medical confidentiality, the CPT’s delegation found that it was rarely respected. 
Medical examinations took place in the presence of custodial staff, who wandered freely around the 
medical unit and were even present when physical examinations of prisoners were being carried 
out. Further, there was no confidentiality of medical records; custodial staff had access to the 
records and some records were left lying about the medical unit in full view of prisoners and 
custodial staff. There is a need to completely review medical confidentiality at KIA. 
 
 The CPT recommends that steps be taken to ensure that medical consultations at KIA 
guarantee medical confidentiality (i.e. that the medical examination is conducted out of the 
hearing and – unless the doctor concerned expressly requests otherwise in a given case – out 
of the sight of non-medical staff).  
 
Further, the CPT recommends that steps be taken to guarantee the confidentiality of 
medical data within the prison. Health-care staff may inform custodial officers on a need-to-
know basis about the state of health of a detained person; however, the information 
provided should be limited to that necessary to prevent a serious risk for the detained person 
or other persons, unless the detained person consents to additional information being given. 
 
 
97. The delegation also observed that nursing staff prepared medication in weekly dosage boxes 
which were subsequently distributed by prison officers up to three times a day. Consequently, 
medication and its dosage are clearly visible to the custodial staff. Such a practice could 
compromise medical confidentiality requirements and does not contribute to the proper 
establishment of a doctor-patient relationship. In the CPT’s view, medication should be distributed 
by health-care staff.  
 
 The CPT recommends that the authorities draw up a list of medication that should in 
every case be distributed by health-care staff (such as anti-psychotics, methadone and 
antiretroviral drugs) and to put in place procedures for the distribution of other medication 
that guarantees confidentiality. Further, the health-care service should ensure that the drugs 
chart, showing which prisoner was provided with which medication and when, is properly 
maintained, and that all missed medication dosages are recorded.
