- 52 - 
6. Other issues 
 
 
a. discipline 
 
 
98. In the course of the 2014 visit, the CPT’s delegation had an opportunity to review the 
disciplinary rules and procedures, and their implementation. 
 
 
99. The rules require that prisoners who are suspected of having committed a disciplinary 
offence should be heard by the Director or another senior officer before a decision on their 
innocence or guilt and punishment is made (see Article 54 (3) of the Prisons Law of 13 December 
2005). However, the Committee has noted that the law does not provide for prisoners to call 
witnesses on their own behalf or to cross-examine witnesses against them. Many prisoners stated 
that contrary to the provisions of the law (Articles 48 (1) and 54 (3)) they had not been informed in 
writing of the charges against them or had a formal hearing prior to being placed in a disciplinary 
cell. Further, they had not received the decision in writing which impeded their possibility to appeal 
the finding and the punishment. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities amend the 2005 Prisons Law to 
strengthen the procedural safeguards in place for prisoners suspected of having committed a 
disciplinary offence, in the light of the above remarks. Further, steps should be taken to 
ensure that the Prisons Law is fully applied. 
 
 
100. The CPT’s delegation found that the disciplinary sanction of solitary confinement was often 
imposed for the maximum period of 14 days and, in accordance with Article 55 of the 2005 Prisons 
Law, could be extended to 30 days in the case of a repeat offence.  
 
The CPT has serious reservations as to the maximum possible periods of disciplinary 
confinement. Solitary confinement can have an extremely damaging effect on the mental, somatic 
and social health of those concerned. Therefore, it should only be imposed as a disciplinary sanction 
in exceptional cases and as a last resort, and for the shortest possible period of time. In the 
Committee’s view, a continuous period of up to 30 days of solitary confinement as a punishment is 
excessive. The Committee considers that the maximum period of solitary confinement as a 
56
punishment should be no more than 14 days for a given offence, and preferably lower. Further, 
there should be a prohibition on sequential disciplinary sentences resulting in an uninterrupted 
period of solitary confinement in excess of that maximum period. Any offences committed by a 
prisoner which might call for more severe sanctions should be dealt with through the criminal 
justice system.  
 
As regards minors, the CPT has very strong reservations as concerns any form of solitary 
confinement of juveniles as this can compromise their physical and/or mental integrity. To this end, 
it considers that a juvenile should never be placed in solitary confinement for disciplinary purposes 
57
for a period exceeding three days. 
 
 
                                                 
56 st
  See the 21 General Report on the CPT’s activities – CPT/Inf (2011) 28, paragraph 56 (b). 
57 th
  See the 18 General Report on the CPT’s activities – CPT/Inf (2008) 25, paragraph 26.
