- 53 - 
Further, the CPT has again noted that solitary confinement was invariably accompanied by 
the corollary punishment of withdrawal of permission to use the telephone and to receive visits. The 
Committee has stated clearly that prisoners undergoing a punishment of solitary confinement as a 
disciplinary sanction should never be totally deprived of contacts with their families and any 
restrictions on such contacts should be imposed only where the offence relates to such contacts. It 
should also be remembered that family members have a right to retain contact under Article 8 of the 
European Convention on Human Rights. In addition, prisoners should be entitled to at least one 
hour of outdoor exercise per day. Consequently, Article 56 of the 2005 Prisons Law should be 
amended accordingly. 
 
The CPT recommends that the 2005 Prisons Law of Aruba in relation to disciplinary 
matters be revised accordingly, taking into account the above remarks.  
 
 
101. The segregation unit, consisting of five cells, was located next to the section for high-
security prisoners. At the time of the visit, one person was being held in segregation for a 10-day 
disciplinary punishment. The cell (measuring some 12 m² and 6m high) was in a state of 
dilapidation, dirty, flooded with water, humid and very poorly ventilated. Access to natural light 
was extremely limited and the artificial lighting was insufficient for reading without straining the 
eyes; the metal sheeting covering the cell bars prevented light from entering the cell and impeded 
the little ventilation available in the unit. The toilet did not function and was constantly leaking 
water into the cell. There were no staff on duty in the unit and no call bell which meant that 
58
prisoners had to shout or throw water into the corridor to catch the attention of the staff 
monitoring the corridor of the unit with CCTV. In sum, the conditions were unfit for holding human 
beings. 
 
 The CPT’s delegation made an immediate observation under Article 8, paragraph 5, of the 
Convention in relation to these cells and requested that, until such time as these cells are provided 
with sufficient access to natural light and adequate ventilation, they should no longer be used for 
accommodating prisoners. Further, the cleanliness and hygiene in the disciplinary section must be 
radically improved. 
 
 By letter of 24 September 2014, the Aruban authorities responded that action had been taken 
to improve the ventilation and hygiene in these cells. Although the renovation of KIA as a whole 
was a priority for the Ministry of Justice, the financial situation in Aruba meant that there was 
currently no funding available. Nevertheless, this matter had been raised with the Dutch Ministry of 
Security and Justice with a view to finding a solution.  
 
The CPT has taken note of this response. However, it considers that action is still 
required before these cells are adequate for accommodating prisoners. The CPT recommends 
that the cells in the segregation unit be provided with sufficient access to natural light and 
adequate artificial lighting, and the defective toilets repaired. Further, all cells should be 
equipped with a call-bell.   
 
 
  
                                                 
58
  Prisoners were provided with a bucket of water with which to wash and to flush the toilet.
