- 54 - 
102. The prison doctor was informed each time a prisoner was placed in a segregation cell for 
longer than 24 hours. However, he played no role in the decision-making process resulting in 
segregation except where the measure was applied for medical reasons. This is positive. On the 
other hand, health-care staff should be very attentive to the situation of all prisoners placed under 
solitary confinement. Not only should they be informed of every such placement but they should 
visit the prisoner immediately after placement and thereafter on a regular basis, at least once a day, 
and provide them with prompt medical assistance and treatment as required. They should 
immediately report to the director whenever a prisoner’s health is being put seriously at risk by 
being held in solitary confinement. This was not occurring at KIA and prisoners held in the 
segregation unit were not visited by health-care staff every day; the prisoner in solitary confinement 
at the time of the visit had not been visited at all by health-care staff even though he had felt 
feverish and had lost a considerable amount of body fluid during the preceding couple of days. 
 
 The CPT recommends that steps be taken to bring the practice at KIA into line with 
the above-mentioned precepts concerning the role of health-care staff in relation to prisoners 
placed in solitary confinement.  
 
 
103. As regards the existing arrangements for urine tests at KIA, the CPT considers that urine 
sample collection and testing for control purposes is essentially a non-medical task that can affect 
the therapeutic relationship with patients when carried out by health-care staff. For this reason, 
health-care staff should not be involved in the collection and testing of urine samples for control 
purposes (i.e. drug abuse). At the same time, staff carrying out urine tests should receive 
appropriate training, and such tests should be carried out in a completely different place to the 
premises utilised by prison medical staff.  
 
 The CPT recommends that the necessary steps be taken to end the involvement of 
health-care staff in carrying out urine tests for control purposes, in the light of the above 
remarks. 
 
 
b. contact with the outside world 
 
 
104. The Committee attaches considerable importance to the maintenance of good contact with 
the outside world for all persons deprived of their liberty. The guiding principle should be to 
promote contact with the outside world as often as possible; any restrictions on such contacts should 
be based exclusively on security concerns of an appreciable nature. Above all, prisoners must be 
59
given the means of safeguarding their relationships with their families and close friends.  
 
 
105. According to Article 27 of the 2005 Prisons Law, prisoners are entitled to at least one visit 
per week of 45 minutes and to a weekly phone call of at least five minutes. In practice, prisoners 
were usually offered visits of one hour a week which is satisfactory although it would be preferable 
for the standard of a minimum of one hour of visits a week to be reflected in the law. As for 
telephone calls, the Committee considers the provision to be too restrictive.  
 
 
                                                 
59
  See CPT Standards: CPT/Inf/E (2002) 1 - Rev. 2011, page 18, paragraph 51.
