- 55 - 
In this context, the delegation received a number of complaints from foreign national 
prisoners about the limited possibilities of contact with their families. The CPT wishes to re-
emphasise the need for some flexibility as regards the application of rules on visits vis-à-vis 
prisoners whose families live far away. Such prisoners should be allowed to accumulate visiting 
time and be given more opportunities to have telephone contacts with their families. 
 
 The CPT recommends that accumulated visiting time for prisoners who receive 
infrequent visits be put in place and that steps be taken to increase prisoners’ access to the 
telephone. Further, the 2005 Prisons Law should be amended to provide prisoners with at least 
one hour of visit time each week and increased access to the telephone. Consideration should 
also be given to exploring the use of communication through Voice over Internet Protocol for 
foreign national prisoners. 
 
 
c. complaints and inspection procedures 
 
 
106. A Prison Supervisory Committee was competent to receive complaints from prisoners at 
KIA and its members could visit prisoners at any time. However, the Supervisory Committee has 
not been functioning since December 2013 following the resignation of its Chairman, a judge from 
the Joint Court of Justice and the Committee’s only paid member. Action should be taken to 
reconstitute the Supervisory Committee as soon as possible and to ensure that it functions 
effectively to examine prisoners’ complaints (i.e. that the members of the Committee are properly 
trained to fulfil their tasks and fully understand the independent nature of their mandate). 
 
Within the prison, complaints were handled by the Head of Social Services and the Director 
of the Prison, with most matters resolved through oral communication with prisoners. However, it 
was not possible to obtain written information on the meetings of the internal prison complaints 
committee (i.e. the minutes). Further, in one case relating to inter-prisoner violence where prison 
officers had apparently allowed the gates between two sections to remain open, thus enabling one 
inmate to attack another inmate, the Head of Social Services had written to the Ministry of Justice 
and the Prison Director seeking action but had not received a response. 
 
 Many prisoners met by the delegation had little confidence in the complaints process and 
stated that they often did not receive any response. Others did not know about how to make a 
complaint and there were no specific complaints forms available. 
 
The CPT considers that the existing internal complaints system needs to be reviewed; for 
example, prisoners ought to be able to make written complaints at any moment and place them in a 
locked complaints box on a prison landing (forms should be freely available); all written complaints 
should be registered centrally within the prison before being allocated to a particular service for 
investigation or follow up. In all cases, the investigation should be carried out expeditiously (with 
any delays justified) and prisoners should be informed within clearly defined time periods of the 
action taken to address their concern or of the reasons for considering the complaint not justified. In 
addition, statistics on the types of complaints made should be kept as an indicator to management of 
areas of discontent within the prison. Of course, prison officers should be encouraged and 
empowered as far as possible to resolve complaints themselves and if this is not possible recourse to 
a written procedure should be promoted.
