- 57 - 
D. Psychiatric Department (PAAZ) at Dr Horacio Oduber Hospital 
 
 
1. Preliminary remarks 
 
 
60
108. The PAAZ, located in a separate building on the grounds of Dr Horacio Oduber Hospital, 
is the only mental health-care institution in Aruba where patients subject to an involuntary 
placement order may be accommodated. PAAZ consists of four units set out around a large garden 
courtyard: a nine-bed admission unit, a 10-bed follow-up unit, a 21-bed long-stay unit and a 15-
place day-care unit). At the time of the visit, the department was accommodating 32 patients. 
  
 The CPT’s delegation undertook a targeted visit to the admission unit, the only closed ward 
of the clinic, which was accommodating seven patients, two of whom were being held on an 
involuntary basis.  
 
At the outset, the CPT wishes to state that the PAAZ department appeared to be a caring, 
well-run and supportive, therapeutic establishment. The delegation received no allegations of ill-
treatment by staff.  
 
 
2. Patients’ living conditions and treatment 
 
 
109. The living conditions in the admission unit were of a satisfactory nature, with the four 
double-occupancy rooms and two single-occupancy rooms, all of an adequate size, suitably 
furnished, bright and airy. Patients had access to a large sitting and dining room area at one end of 
the unit where they could relax, watch television, smoke and take their meals. The bathroom and 
toilet areas were clean and hygienic. Patients had access to a large inner garden area every day for 
one or two hours, and could also meet their visitors there. 
 
 Two isolation rooms were located at the far end of the unit. 
 
 
110. As for treatment, each patient had an individual care plan drawn up which was reviewed on 
a weekly basis by a psychiatrist. A broad range of treatment was offered, including 
pharmacotherapy, individual and group psychotherapy, occupational therapy (art, music), group 
sessions and a range of activities.  
 
 Electro-convulsive therapy (ECT) was not applied but patients could be sent to Curaçao for 
such treatment if considered necessary. 
 
 
  
                                                 
60
  PAAZ stands for Psychiatrische Afdeling Algemeen Ziekenhuis (Psychiatric Department of General Hospital).
