- 58 - 
3. Staff 
 
 
111. In general, staffing levels at PAAZ were good.  There were four psychiatrists working on a 
part-time basis, 27 full-time nurses, five occupational and assistant therapists and a psychologist 
was scheduled to start working at the department in September 2014. A coordinator (social worker) 
and two care managers were responsible for the management of PAAZ. A general practitioner was 
on-call from the hospital and patients could also attend the hospital for appointments. Three nurses 
were on duty at the admission unit for each shift.  
 
The CPT would like to receive confirmation that a psychologist now works at PAAZ.  
 
 
4. Seclusion and means of restraint 
 
 
112. Recourse to the use of mechanical means of restraint at PAAZ was very infrequent with the 
last application having been in 2012. If nurses were unable to calm an agitated patient through de-
escalation techniques, resort to manual restraint or seclusion was possible. Further, medication for 
rapid tranquillisation was used. In all cases the resort to means of restraint and seclusion was 
reported to a doctor. In the case of seclusion, the measure usually lasted less than 24 hours but could 
be longer (e.g. in May 2013 a patient had spent four days in seclusion) and staff told the delegation 
that seclusion for periods of several weeks was possible. The measure was reviewed on a daily basis 
by the psychiatrist and the patient would be visited every two hours by a nurse. At the end of the 
period of seclusion, a debriefing would take place. For every instance of seclusion or other measure 
of means of restraint a separate sheet was used to record the measure (the time at which the measure 
began and ended; the circumstances of the case; the reasons for resorting to the measure; the name 
of the doctor who ordered or approved it; whether the measure was part of a treatment plan). 
However, it did not appear that the management of PAAZ were using the available information to 
obtain an oversight of the extent of the resort to isolation and other means of restraint and to enable 
measures to be taken, where appropriate, to reduce their incidence.  
 
The CPT would appreciate the comments of the Aruban authorities on this matter. 
 
The Committee would further like to receive confirmation that a measure of seclusion 
is always ordered by a doctor and that only in emergency situations is the measure applied by 
nursing staff and the doctor subsequently informed. 
 
Further, the CPT would like to receive a copy of PAAZ’s policy on restraint, including 
on issues associated with restraint such as staff training, complaints policy, reporting 
mechanisms and debriefing.
