- 59 - 
5. Safeguards 
 
 
a. initial placement procedure 
 
 
113. The procedure by which involuntary placement is decided should offer guarantees of 
independence and impartiality as well as of objective medical expertise. Leaving aside emergency 
cases, the formal decision to place a person in a psychiatric hospital should always be based on the 
opinion of at least one doctor with psychiatric qualifications, and preferably two and the actual 
placement decision should be taken by a different body from the one that recommended it. Further, a 
patient must have the right to appeal the measure to a court or mental health tribunal; which should 
see the patient before deciding on the involuntary placement measure if this is possible and not 
detrimental to the person’s health. The patient should also be entitled to legal assistance in such 
proceedings. Where the patient does not appear before the judge, he or she should normally be 
represented by a person acting in his or her interests.  
 
 
114. The procedure for the involuntary placement of a civil nature in Aruba is regulated by 
61
Article 15 of the 1992 National Ordinance on Mental Health which provides for the Minister of 
Health to authorise an involuntary placement based upon the statement of a psychiatrist. The form 
the psychiatrist must complete was provided for by Article 8(3) of the 1992 Ordinance and 
continues to be used despite Article 8 of the Law having been abrogated. The form requires a 
statement of the symptoms, a diagnosis, the time and date the doctor last saw the patient, how often 
the patient has been seen by the doctor or another person and any other relevant information. The 
same form is used for the renewal of an involuntary placement order. In an emergency, a nurse may 
sign the order but a doctor must then see the patient within 24 hours.  
 
 Patients are not allowed to see the form drawn up by the doctor but may write to the 
Minister of Health to oppose an application, if they are informed that such an application is being 
made. They may also call a lawyer which does not occur often and in one recent case the lawyer 
advised the patient against mounting a challenge to the order after seeing for himself that the patient 
was ill. Further, patients do not receive any written reasons for decisions on involuntary placement 
unless they request them specifically, and there is no procedure for a hearing to be held. Moreover, 
there is no legal remedy to challenge the involuntary placement. 
 
 The above-mentioned procedures clearly fall short of providing adequate safeguards for 
patients subject to a measure of involuntary placement. A proper legal framework regulating this 
matter needs to be adopted.  
 
The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities review the procedures for 
involuntary placement at PAAZ in order to meet the standards set out in paragraph 113 
above.  
 
  
                                                 
61
  Krankzinnigenverordening (AB 1992 no. GT 15) which translates literally as “Lunatic Ordinance”.
