- 60 - 
More particularly, steps should be taken to ensure that: 
 
 involuntary placement orders are always based on the opinion of at least one doctor with 
psychiatric qualifications, and preferably two; the need for such placements should be 
reviewed at regular intervals; 
 a person who is involuntarily placed in a psychiatric establishment by a non-judicial 
authority must have the right to bring proceedings by which the lawfulness of his 
detention shall be decided speedily by a court; 
 the court seeks an opinion from a psychiatrist outside the hospital concerned in the 
context of involuntary placement decisions or extensions thereof; 
 patients who are admitted to a psychiatric hospital on an involuntary basis have the 
effective right to be heard in person by the court during placement or appeal 
procedures; 
 the patient concerned receives a copy of any decision on involuntary placement in 
PAAZ and is informed in writing about the reasons for the decision and the 
avenues/deadlines for lodging an appeal; 
 a patient is entitled to legal assistance in the context of involuntary placement 
decisions; 
 patients themselves are able to request at reasonable intervals that the necessity for 
their continued placement be considered by a judicial authority. 
 
 
b. safeguards during placement 
 
 
115. At the PAAZ admission unit, the involuntary admission of a patient was considered to provide 
the authorisation to administer compulsory treatment.  
 
The CPT has fundamental objections to such an approach. The Committee considers that 
patients should, as a matter of principle, be placed in a position to give their free and informed 
consent to treatment. The admission of a person to a psychiatric establishment on an involuntary basis 
should not be construed as authorising treatment without his or her consent. It follows that every 
patient, whether voluntary or involuntary, should be given the opportunity to refuse treatment or any 
other medical intervention. Any derogation from this fundamental principle should be based upon law 
and only relate to clearly and strictly defined exceptional circumstances. 
 
Of course, consent to treatment can only be qualified as free and informed if it is based on full, 
accurate and comprehensible information about the patient's condition and the treatment proposed. 
Consequently, all patients should be provided systematically with relevant information about their 
condition and the treatment which it is proposed to prescribe for them. Relevant information (results, 
etc.) should also be provided following treatment. 
 
The CPT recommends that the Aruban authorities take the necessary steps to recognise 
the principle of free and informed consent to treatment, in the light of the above remarks.
