- 63 - 
120. Detention up to ten days at police stations still occurs in Curaçao. However, the CPT found 
that the current practice was for persons to be held at police stations for a couple of days at most 
(often only a few hours) before being transferred to a specific unit for persons still under police 
custody at the prison, SDKK.  
 
The CPT welcomes the steps taken by the authorities of Curaçao to institute a practice of 
transferring persons in police custody from police premises to the prison within a few days of 
apprehension. However, although the detained persons were held in a prison block operated by 
prison staff, in fact the police continued to exercise full authority over these persons. It appeared 
that prison staff at Block 1 could not enter the cells without permission from the police, even in the 
case of a medical emergency.  
 
The CPT recommends that police custody does not exceed the initial period of two 
days (inverzekeringstelling) and that any further extensions of detention are carried out at 
SDKK. Further, once a detained person has been physically transferred to the prison, full 
authority over their care should be transferred to prison staff and Block 1 should be formally 
integrated into the prison structure. 
 
 
121. Moreover, the delegation found that police stations continue to be used in exceptional 
circumstances for holding prisoners for extended periods of time, apparently for reasons of 
protection. A review of the registers showed that a number of persons had been held for three 
months or more. A former police officer awaiting extradition had spent 120 days at Barber Police 
Station, while a suspect in a high profile case had spent eight months at Barber before being 
transferred to SDKK on 12 May 2014. Rio Canario Police Station held another suspect in the same 
case from 29 October 2013 and following his conviction on 29 August 2014 he continued to be held 
there.  
 
A new unit for separation and protection of prisoners at SDKK was due to be brought into 
service in the near future. The delegation was told that this unit should put an end to all forms of 
long-term detention at police stations. 
 
The CPT would like to be informed whether the new unit at SDKK is now operational 
and, if so, what regime is in place. Further, it wishes to receive confirmation that long-term 
detention of prisoners no longer takes place in police stations.  
 
 
122. The delegation visited the police stations of Barber and Rio Canario, as well as Block 1 of 
71
SDKK. 
 
 
  
                                                 
71
  The CPT previously visited Punda Police Station during its visits in 1994 (CPT/Inf (96) 1) and in 2007 
(CPT/Inf (2008) 2); however, at the time of the 2014 visit it was no longer used for detaining suspects.
