- 64 - 
2. Ill-treatment 
 
 
123. Most persons met by the delegation stated that they had been treated correctly by the police 
both at the time of their apprehension and during their detention.  
 
However, a number of allegations, including from juveniles, were received of excessive use 
of force by police officers at the time of apprehension and several persons stated that they had been 
kicked or punched by officers after they had been handcuffed.  
 
 For example, one person, arrested at home in the presence of his family, alleged that after 
having been pushed to the floor and his wrists cuffed behind his back, a member of the special 
arrest team had hit him in the neck. Further, he stated that he was kept on the floor for 
approximately 15 minutes with his eyes covered and that he was blindfolded during his transport to 
Barber Police Station. 
 
 
124. The CPT has acknowledged in the past that the apprehension of a suspect may be hazardous, 
particularly if the individual concerned resists apprehension and/or the law enforcement officials 
have reason to believe that the person might be armed and dangerous. The circumstances may be 
such that the apprehended person, and possibly also law enforcement officials, suffer injuries, 
without this being the result of an intention to inflict ill-treatment. However, no more force than is 
strictly necessary should be used and, once apprehended persons have been brought under control, 
there can never be any justification for them being struck. Similarly, resort to physical force should 
not be the automatic response when a law enforcement official is confronted by a person who 
contests his authority.  
 
The CPT recommends that police officers be regularly reminded, through training and 
instructions, that no more force than is strictly necessary should be used when effecting an 
apprehension. Senior police officers should remind their subordinates that ill-treatment is not 
acceptable and will be punished accordingly. This message should be recalled in an 
appropriate form at suitable intervals. 
 
 
125. Furthermore, the CPT has strong objections to law enforcement officials blindfolding or 
hooding apprehended persons. In the Committee’s experience, the purpose of such a practice is 
most often to prevent such persons from being able to identify law enforcement officials who inflict 
ill-treatment upon them. Even in cases when no physical ill-treatment occurs, to blindfold a person 
in custody - and in particular someone undergoing questioning or being transported from one place 
to another - is a form of oppressive conduct, the effect of which on the person concerned will 
frequently amount to psychological ill-treatment.  
 
The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities expressly prohibit the blindfolding 
of persons who are in the custody of police.
