- 65 - 
126.  Several efforts to address ill-treatment by police officials have been undertaken since the 
previous CPT visit, including the issuing of guidelines on the investigation of complaints against 
72
the police and the introduction of a training course for police officers on use of force, arrest and 
self-defence skills and use of firearms. These measures have contributed to a decrease in the 
number of allegations of police ill-treatment since the 2007 visit. Nevertheless, the CPT wishes to 
stress that it is important for the authorities to remain vigilant and pursue their efforts to completely 
root out ill-treatment.  
 
An overview of complaints of ill-treatment by police officers reported to the public 
prosecutor showed 17 cases in 2009, 57 in 2010, 15 in 2011, 23 in 2012 (of which two were 
prosecuted as acts of torture), and 17 in 2013. Of the 17 cases in 2013, most complaints involved 
allegations of either a push or a slap by a police officer.  
 
The CPT would like to be informed of the disciplinary/criminal sanctions imposed in 
respect of the complaints of police ill-treatment for the years 2010 to 2014 inclusive.  
 
 
3. Safeguards against ill-treatment 
 
 
a. introduction 
 
 
127. The CPT attaches particular importance to three fundamental safeguards for persons 
deprived of their liberty by the police: the right of those concerned to inform a close relative or 
another person of their choice of their situation; the right of access to a lawyer; and the right of 
access to a doctor. These three rights represent fundamental safeguards against the ill-treatment of 
persons deprived of their liberty, which should apply from the very outset of custody. In addition, it 
is important that all detained persons are informed of their rights in a language they understand. 
 
 
b. notification of custody 
 
 
128. Under the Code of Conduct and Use of Force Instructions for the Police Force of the 
73
Netherlands Antilles a police officer shall immediately inform a relative or household member of 
the detained person’s arrest. If the detained person is a minor the police shall do this on their own 
initiative. However, if the detained person is an adult, notification shall be made only upon request. 
If circumstances prevent the police from doing so when a detained person is not a resident of 
74
Curaçao, the consulate of the country of which he/she is a resident should be notified of the arrest. 
 
Most persons interviewed indicated that their right to promptly inform a close relative or 
another person of their choice of their arrest had been respected. Notification is mostly performed 
by the police, however, as restrictions on contact with the outside world exist in most cases during 
the first 10 days of detention.  
 
                                                 
72
  See for instance “SIRBI I PROTEHÁ – normen en richtlijnen voor OM-afhandeling interne zaken KPC”. 
73
  Regeling ambts- en geweldsinstructie KPNA (Official Bulletin of the Netherlands Antilles 2001, no. 73), 
(hereinafter Police Code of Conduct).   
74
  Article 12 of the Police Code of Conduct.
