- 66 - 
c. access to a lawyer 
 
 
129. As the CPT has stated in the past, its objective of guaranteeing an effective right of access to 
a lawyer during police custody is not primarily linked to issues of due process or the right to a fair 
trial; it is aimed at preventing ill-treatment. In the CPT’s experience, it is during the period 
immediately following the deprivation of liberty that the risk of intimidation and ill-treatment is at 
its greatest. 
 
It follows that to be effective as a safeguard against ill-treatment, access to a lawyer must be 
guaranteed as from the very outset of deprivation of liberty. The right of access to a lawyer must 
include the right to talk to him/her in private; the detained person should also, in principle, be 
entitled to have the lawyer present during any interview with law enforcement officials. 
 
 
130. The right of detained persons to have access to a lawyer is formally guaranteed in Article 48 
of the CCP. However, there is no specific right to consult a lawyer as from the very outset of police 
custody. Article 48(4) CCP states that legal counsel may not be present during police interviews 
until the suspect has appeared before an investigating judge, which can take up to three days and 16 
hours from the moment of arrest.    
 
Following the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Salduz v. 
75
Turkey and the Dutch Supreme Court’s interpretation of its impact on the Dutch legal system, the 
modalities of the right of access to a lawyer for persons detained by the police in the Kingdom of 
the Netherlands underwent important changes. Any criminal suspect is now entitled to consult 
his/her own lawyer prior to the first interview on the substance of the case and, in the case of a 
minor, the lawyer can be present during interviews (but cannot actively intervene during the 
questioning). In Curaçao, this is reflected in a policy document of the Public Prosecutor, which 
mentions a right to consult a lawyer before the first interview, but not to have a lawyer present 
during police interviews. In practice, it appears that, particularly in serious cases, lawyers are often 
allowed to be present. 
 
 The delegation received no complaints from detained persons regarding their right to be 
assisted by a lawyer. They were duly informed of their right to consult a lawyer and could do so 
before police interviews started. However, in most cases such contact with a duty lawyer 
(piketadvocaat) was by telephone, and detained persons usually only met with their lawyer when 
appearing before a judge. 
 
The delegation was informed that the draft CCP includes the right for suspects to have a 
lawyer present during police interviews in serious cases. While this would indeed be an 
improvement, additional steps are required to render the situation satisfactory.  
 
The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities ensure that all persons arrested 
have the right of access to a lawyer from the very outset of their deprivation of liberty, 
including during any police interview. Such a right should include access to an ex officio 
lawyer if required. 
  
                                                 
75
  Salduz v. Turkey (Application no. 336391/02), 27 November 2008.
