- 67 - 
d. access to a doctor 
 
 
131. According to Article 17 of the Police Code of Conduct, a doctor shall be consulted in the 
case of a specific request to see a doctor or when a detained person is clearly ill or injured. The 
information gathered during the visit suggests that detained persons were able to consult a doctor if 
needed. 
 
However, the delegation did receive complaints from persons in police custody who were 
held in Block 1 in SDKK. Whenever a detained person requested medical attention, prison officers 
had to call a police doctor or nurse. Such a procedure can cause serious delay and is completely 
unnecessary given the fact that the prison has its own medical service.  
 
In the context of the CPT’s overall recommendation to place Block 1 under the full authority 
of SDKK (see paragraph 120), the CPT recommends that the medical care for all persons held 
in Block 1 be placed under the responsibility of the prison health-care service. 
 
 
132. The delegation further found that no medical screening was performed on detained persons 
arriving at Block 1. Prompt medical screening of newly arrived detained persons is essential to 
prevent the spread of transmissible diseases and for recording injuries in good time. Medical 
screening can also be used to identify mental illness, addictions and dietary needs. 
 
The CPT recommends that every newly admitted prisoner to SDKK be medically 
assessed (see also paragraph 167). 
 
 
133. Curaçao is a major trafficking point for the transportation of cocaine emanating from South 
America and destined for North America and Europe. Drug trafficking by body-packers (bolita- or 
bolletjesslikkers) continues to be a serious problem. The Rio Canario Police Station was designated 
to hold these suspects. In 2005, the cell block was fitted with special toilets to recover drugs that 
were swallowed or otherwise inserted into the body. In addition to specialised equipment, however, 
detention of suspected body-packers requires appropriate medical supervision, due to the serious 
risk of acute intoxication and obstruction of the intestines, both of which may lead to death. 
Laxatives were administered by police officers without guidance from health professionals, which 
can be dangerous given the risk of side effects and contraindications leading to medical 
complications.  
 
The CPT recommends that appropriate medical supervision always be made available 
for the detention of suspected body-packers. It would further like to receive information on 
the temporary airport facility for the detention of body-packers and the treatment and care 
protocols in place there, as well as in the new cells at Rio Canario Police Station.
