- 68 - 
e. information on rights 
 
 
134. Article 82 CCP states that a person who has been arrested shall be promptly informed of the 
reasons for his/her arrest, the right to an attorney, and the right to remain silent. This shall be done 
in a language he/she understands and shall also be provided in writing. The written notification shall 
at all times be available in at least Dutch, Papiamentu, English and Spanish.  
 
 In 2007, the CPT recommended that the written information on rights sheet that is provided 
to detainees includes a reference to the right to have a close relative or other person notified of 
76
one’s arrest, and the right to have access to a doctor. The notification of rights sheets collected by 
the delegation in 2014 did indeed include such a reference in the Dutch version. The versions in 
Papiamentu, English, Spanish and French, however, did not. This lacuna should be corrected in 
order to ensure that all the various language versions are accurate. 
 
 
f. electronic recording of police interviews 
 
 
135. The electronic (i.e. audio and/or video) recording of police interviews represents an important 
additional safeguard against the ill-treatment of detainees. Such a facility can provide a complete and 
authentic record of the interview process, thereby greatly facilitating the investigation of any 
allegations of ill-treatment. This is in the interest both of persons who have been ill-treated by the 
police and of police officers confronted with unfounded allegations that they have engaged in physical 
ill-treatment or psychological pressure. Electronic recording of police interviews also reduces the 
opportunity for defendants to later falsely deny that they have made certain statements.  
 
There is currently no practice of recording police interviews on Curaçao. However, the new 
draft CCP includes an obligation to record police interviews in serious cases. The CPT welcomes 
the fact that the recording of police interviews will be made a standard practice. Nevertheless, it 
would like to be informed as to which cases will be covered by this practice. 
 
Further, the CPT recommends that the system to be introduced should offer all 
appropriate safeguards (such as the use of several tapes, one of which would be sealed in the 
presence of the detained person and a copy used as the working tape). A copy of the electronic 
recording should be made available to the detained person and/or his/her lawyer on request. 
The obligation to record should be reflected in applicable laws and policies.  
 
 
  
                                                 
76
  See the report on the 2007 visit (CPT/Inf (2008) 2), Part 3, paragraph 26.
