- 69 - 
g. custody records 
 
 
136. In the report on the 2007 visit, the CPT noted that custody recording practices varied 
considerably from one police station to another, none providing a comprehensive custody record. It 
recommended that authorities consider the possibility of drawing up an individualised custody 
record for use at all police stations and including all aspects of custody, as well as all measures 
77
taken in connection with it. Since then, the comprehensive ICT application ACTPOL has been 
78
developed and made available for use at all police stations. The CPT welcomes the introduction of 
this system. However, on a number of occasions it appeared that only basic information was 
recorded, leaving out other actions relating to detained persons (e.g. visits received, requests made 
and incidents). 
 
The CPT recommends that clear guidelines on the use of the system be introduced, in 
the light of the above remarks.  
 
 
137. The CPT found that individual custody records, both at police stations and at Block 1 at 
SDKK, often only included a copy of the first warrant for police custody (bevel tot 
inverzekeringstelling), while further warrants could not be found. It appeared that extension of 
custody was communicated by the prosecutor by phone, but police and prison officials were not 
provided with a copy of the valid warrant.  
   
The CPT recommends that a valid warrant, providing the legal basis for custody, 
always be kept in the individual custody record of a detained person. A valid warrant should 
automatically be provided by the authority ordering the custody to the authority responsible 
for executing it.  
 
 
4. Conditions of detention 
 
 
138. In the report on the 2007 visit, the conditions of detention in Barber Police Station were 
79
severely criticised. At the time of the 2014 visit, the delegation observed that this facility had been 
renovated.  
 
An in-cell call-bell system had been installed, as well as three surveillance cameras in the 
corridors of the detention block. Air-conditioning now ensured comfortable temperatures. The cell 
block consists of ten cells, each measuring some 6.5 m² and equipped with in-cell semi-partitioned 
toilet and shower; eight of the cells had two beds. However, access to natural light was very limited. 
The CPT notes that cells under 7 m² provide limited space for one person and are absolutely 
inadequate for keeping more than one detained person for overnight detention. 
                                                 
77
  See the report on the 2007 visit (CPT/Inf (2008) 2), Part 3, paragraph 27.  
78
  ACTPOL can be used to register at least the following information in individualised files: general information 
(name of detained person, date and time of start and end of custody, ID number of the commanding officer and 
status), the charge, searches performed and personal goods taken into possession, limitations, cell occupation, 
transfers, dietary needs (including type of food, quantity, times, allergies), medical information (including 
medication needed, where medication is kept and when and how it should be provided), health insurance 
information, financial transactions relating to the detained person, and other relevant information, such as cell 
searches, visitors, requests of the detained person, phone calls made on behalf of the detained person, etc. 
79
  See the report on the 2007 visit (CPT/Inf (2008) 2), Part 3, paragraph 19 and 20.
