- 70 - 
 In sum, material conditions could generally be considered as satisfactory for the purposes of 
police detention not exceeding a few days, if all cells are used for single-occupancy only and access 
to natural light is improved.  
 
 The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities take the necessary steps in the light 
of the above remarks.  
 
 
139. By contrast, material conditions at Rio Canario Police Station continued to be inadequate and 
the renovations planned for 2014 had still not taken place at the time of the CPT’s visit. There was 
very limited access to natural light in the 14 cells and the temperatures in these cells were high 
(between 30 and 35 degrees Celsius). Seven cells had serious sewage problems resulting in a putrid 
smell pervading the whole cell block.  
 
 The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities proceed rapidly with the planned 
renovations. 
 
 Four new cells visited by the delegation were not yet in use. The delegation, however, 
observed that access to natural light was limited in these cells as well. 
 
 
140. Block 1 of SDKK consists of 15 cells, each measuring 8.5 m² and has an official capacity 
of 37. At the time of the visit, however, seven cells were out of order and the block was holding 13 
persons; 11 police detainees and two prisoners on protection. 
 
Block 1 was found to be in a state of dilapidation and disrepair, with holes in the ceilings of 
the cells, leaking water, dysfunctional sanitary facilities, lack of access to natural light and non-
functioning artificial lighting. Rats, cockroaches, pigeons and other pests infested the block. The 
lack of care was illustrated by the label on the fire extinguisher, which stated it was due for its next 
inspection in August 2010. There was only one way out of the block, through a corridor with 
several locked doors, creating a dangerous situation in the event of a fire or other emergency.  
 
At the end of the visit, the delegation highlighted the poor material conditions of detention 
in Block 1 and requested that the Curaçao authorities take urgent steps to renovate this block.  
 
By letter of 24 September 2014, the authorities informed the CPT that renovations of 
Block 1 were ongoing and planned to be finalised in February 2015. These renovations were to 
include new sanitary facilities and new lighting as well as beds, mattresses and pillows from prisons 
in the Netherlands that had been closed.  
 
The CPT would like to receive confirmation of the implementation of the announced 
renovations and refurbishments.
