- 71 - 
141. Detained persons in Block 1 had no access to television, radio or newspapers and no 
activities were offered. Access to the outdoor exercise yard (56 m²) for one hour per day was 
provided if more than one prison officer was present. The yard was equipped with a basketball ring, 
but no seats or shelter from the sun or rain. Indeed, while each shift was supposed to have four 
officers, often only two were present and about twice a week only one officer was on duty. The 
delegation further observed that extensive restrictions, including on contact with the outside world, 
are almost automatically imposed by the prosecutor for the first ten days of detention.  
 
The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities ensure that all detained persons 
are offered a minimum of one hour of outdoor exercise every day. Further, an improved 
regime should be put in place as detention at Block 1 generally lasted up to ten days and often 
even longer. 
 
The CPT also recommends that the regulations governing access to visits, telephone 
calls, newspapers, radio and television are reviewed in order to ensure restrictions are 
imposed only when required to protect the legitimate interests of the police investigation, 
assessed on a case by case basis, in accordance with Article 90(1) of the CCP. 
 
 
142. The police stations of Barber and Rio Canario continued to be used for longer periods of 
detention whenever certain prisoners were considered to be at risk among the general population at 
SDKK. 
 
80
 One person interviewed by the delegation claimed that he had been held at Barber Police 
Station in complete isolation for 40 days, after which he had been allowed to go for outdoor 
exercise together with other detained persons. He said that the only reading material permitted was 
a bible and that he had received a small radio after seven months. He further claimed to have been 
without a blanket for two months. Conditions such as these, which are akin to solitary confinement, 
could amount to inhuman and degrading treatment.  
 
 Another person interviewed indicated that he had been held at Rio Canario Police Station for 
eight months, with no radio or television or reading materials. He had access to outdoor exercise for 
two hours in the morning and two hours in the afternoon in the large exercise yard.  
 
The CPT reiterates that the conditions of detention at police stations are completely 
inadequate for long-term detention.  
 
The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities make every effort to find 
alternative solutions to long-term detention at police stations, such as the use of a special unit 
within SDKK (see also paragraph 185).  
 
  
                                                 
80
  This person was held at Barber Police Station from 20 September 2013 until 12 May 2014, when he was 
transferred to a general population block at SDKK. While authorities claimed that his placement there was for 
his own protection, the fact that he was consequently transferred to a general population block would appear to 
belie this argument. The detained person claimed that his conditions of detention were designed to pressure 
him to confess as he had stated explicitly that he had no problems with being held at SDKK and had formally 
requested transfers at least twice.
