- 73 - 
B. Centre for Detention and Correction Curaçao - SDKK 
 
 
1. Preliminary remarks 
 
 
144. The prison, located in the neighbourhood of Koraal Specht, and formerly known as Bon 
Futuro, changed its name in 2010 to Centre for Detention and Correction Curaçao (Sentro di 
Detenshon i Korekshon Kòrsou or SDKK). This was the CPT’s sixth visit to this establishment. In 
its report on the 2007 visit, the CPT stated that it had received several allegations of physical ill-
treatment by prison staff, most of them involving an intervention by members of the Correctional 
Emergency Response Team (CERT). It had further expressed serious concerns with regard to the 
problem of inter-prisoner violence. Material conditions in the disciplinary unit were severely 
criticised, as was the absence of a call-bell system. 
 
 
145. The official capacity at SDKK was 674 (similar to the number in 2007). However, the actual 
capacity had been drastically reduced due to many cells being out of commission as they were not 
considered fit for human occupation. At the time of the visit, SDKK had a total of 399 places, 
including the psychiatric unit, high security unit, women’s unit and the semi-open unit for men, and 
81
was holding 332 inmates, with all 298 places in the general population blocks occupied. 
 
 
146.  In June 2010, as part of preparations for the constitutional changes of the Kingdom of the 
Netherlands, it was agreed that Curaçao would have to develop a specific action plan (Plan van 
Aanpak) with regard to certain institutions and report regularly on the implementation of these 
plans. The action plan for SDKK included plans to improve the physical state of the prison, the 
security of the prison, the regime for and treatment of prisoners, and the correction and reintegration 
function of the prison, as well as its management. Implementation of this plan has clearly had a 
82
positive impact on SDKK to date. However, much work remains to be done.   
 
 
147. At the outset, the CPT would like to note that it observed gaps in documentation held by the 
prison administration at SDKK. The delegation found that files of unsentenced prisoners generally 
did not contain any written warrants providing a legal basis for their detention, as extensions of 
detention were being communicated by the Prosecutor’s Office by phone. Further, there were no 
registers regarding incidents, use of force, use of means of restraint, injuries or complaints. The 
delegation also found irregularities in the list of prisoners, such as the inclusion of a certain prisoner 
who had already been released more than a month earlier and another prisoner who had been 
transferred to the Netherlands two months earlier. 
 
Proper administration and documentation is crucial for effective prison management.  
 
The CPT recommends that a full review of the record-keeping system at SDKK be 
carried out, including the introduction of the above-mentioned registers and full 
documentation of the legal basis for the detention of each individual held at SDKK. 
  
                                                 
81
  These are the numbers reflected in the official documents provided to the delegation, dated 4 May 2014. 
82
  For example, security had improved through the construction of a separate entrance outside the main prison 
premises where visitors are checked and goods are being received.
