- 74 - 
2. Ill-treatment 
 
 
148. In the course of the 2014 visit, the delegation received no credible allegations of ill-
treatment of inmates by prison staff, which represents a significant improvement since the 2007 
visit. It did, however, receive some allegations of abusive language by prison officers.   
 
The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities deliver the clear message to prison 
officers that all forms of ill-treatment, including verbal abuse, are not acceptable and will be 
the subject of sanctions. 
 
 
149. The delegation also received several allegations of inter-prisoner violence and prisoners 
alleged reluctance on the part of staff to intervene when such incidents occurred. While a decrease 
in violence can be noted compared to the previous visit, these numbers still need to be reduced 
further in order to ensure safe custody for all prisoners. 
 
 Addressing the phenomenon of inter-prisoner violence and intimidation requires that prison 
staff be alert to signs of trouble and both resolved and properly trained to intervene when necessary. 
The existence of positive relations between staff and prisoners, based on the notions of dynamic 
security and care, is a decisive factor in this context; this will depend in large measure on staff 
possessing appropriate interpersonal communication skills. It is also obvious that an effective 
strategy to tackle inter-prisoner intimidation/violence should seek to ensure that prison staff are 
placed in a position to exercise their authority in an appropriate manner. Consequently, the level of 
staffing must be sufficient (including at night-time) to enable prison officers to supervise adequately 
the activities of prisoners and support each other effectively in the exercise of their tasks. Both 
initial and ongoing training programmes for staff of all grades must address the issue of managing 
inter-prisoner violence. 
 
 In addition, a key component in the management of inter-prisoner relations is the careful 
assessment, classification and cell allocation of individual prisoners within the prison population.  
 
 The CPT reiterates its recommendation that the prison management of SDKK develop 
a strategy to address the challenge of inter-prisoner violence, taking into account the above 
remarks. 
 
Further, all incidents and injuries resulting from violence should be registered so as to 
better monitor the situation and identify potential risks in order to prevent inter-prisoner 
violence.
