- 75 - 
3. Conditions of detention 
 
 
a. material conditions 
 
 
150.  The CPT noted some improvements of the material conditions in comparison to previous 
visits. Nevertheless, serious problems remained in a number of blocks (particularly Blocks 2, 7B 
and 8) which were in a bad state of repair and had sewage problems, escalating the poor hygiene 
conditions and causing a foul stench. Some efforts were being made to control pests, but these 
appeared to be inadequate given the presence of rats, cockroaches, pigeons and other pests. Many of 
the cells were out of use due to leaks and other problems, creating a health hazard. Stagnant water 
provided a breeding ground for mosquitoes. The Prison Supervisory Committee (Commissie van 
Toezicht) had warned that fire safety measures were not in place and that the necessary equipment 
and security checks were not performed regularly; this was confirmed by the delegation. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the necessary steps be taken to refurbish and improve the 
material conditions at SDKK in the light of the above remarks.  
 
 
b. regime 
 
 
151. According to an overview of available workplaces in 2013, the number of places per month 
fluctuated between 178 and 201, roughly two-thirds of which related to cleaning. There were 
approximately 35 places in the different workshops (sewing, carpentry, car mechanics and 
upholstery), between 7 and 15 places in maintenance, around 20 places in the kitchen. The overview 
does not show, however, for how many hours per day or week a certain prisoner is actually engaged 
in labour for each of these functions. 
 
 The building and refurbishing of workshops, a fitness centre, a computer room and 
classrooms had created more physical space for purposeful activities. The schedule of regular 
activities provided to the delegation showed that every block had access at least once a week to 
sports, fitness, the library and spiritual development (BGV).  
 
 Moreover, the programme of education on offer as of January 2014 included classes on 
social skills (for those nearing their release date), computer skills, handicrafts, literacy (Papiamentu) 
83
and finally music classes for those in JoVo and FOBA.  
 
 
152. Certainly, the number of activities being offered represented a major step forward compared 
to the situation found in 2007. Nevertheless, the delegation received numerous complaints from 
prisoners about the lack of activities on offer, particularly educational and work opportunities, and 
observed that most prisoners spent their days in a situation of enforced idleness. Many prisoners 
stated that they did not have any opportunity to work or study. The offer of vocational courses 
appeared to be sporadic, offering a certain class for a couple of months which was subsequently no 
longer available for a while. The delegation found that shortage of both staff on post and other 
resources seriously affected access to activities.  
                                                 
83
  See explanation in paragraph 171.
