- 76 - 
 Ensuring that prisoners are engaged in purposeful activities of a varied nature (work, 
preferably with vocational value; education; sport; recreation/association) is not only an essential 
part of rehabilitation and resocialisation, but it also contributes to the establishment of a more 
secure environment within prisons.  
 
The CPT recommends that Curaçao authorities vigorously pursue their efforts to put 
in place a range of purposeful activities for all prisoners. 
 
 
153. Documentation provided to the delegation showed that a number of prisoners who were 
enrolled in certain courses stopped active participation or dropped out completely, citing a 
preference for employment over studying as a reason. Taking part in educational activities should 
not place prisoners at a disadvantage by depriving them of the opportunity to earn money.  
  
 The CPT recommends that opportunities be created in such a way that those who 
study continue to have the possibility to earn an income. 
 
 
c.  juveniles and young adults 
 
 
154. In November 2009, a special young adults section (jong volwassenen or JoVo) was opened 
at SDKK, with a capacity of 34. This block holds juveniles and young adults between the ages of 16 
and 24. The National Ordinance on Compulsory Youth Training of 2006 provides that juveniles and 
young adults between the ages of 16 and 24 are obliged to participate in a social and educational 
programme if they have no educational qualifications. Block JoVo was developed to accommodate 
those who fall under this obligation and is intended to offer a range of educational programmes, 
including personal and work skills training, language/literacy classes and sports therapy. At the time 
of the visit, the delegation was informed that JoVo was also used to accommodate first-time 
offenders and remand prisoners. The amount of activities actually on offer did not appear to 
correspond with what was supposed to be on offer. In addition, remand prisoners were not provided 
with any activities, other than access to the gym twice a month for half an hour. 
 
 A full programme of activities should be available for young adults held at JoVo, 
including for those on remand.  
 
 
155. At the time of the visit, only two juveniles were being held in JoVo, one of whom was on 
remand and was offered no activities and provided with no support. Further, the conditions in the 
cells were no better than elsewhere in the prison, and showed signs of dilapidation and poor hygiene 
(e.g. blocked toilets and water leakage).  
 
In the CPT's view, all juvenile prisoners, including those on remand, should be held in 
detention centres specifically designed for persons of this age, offering regimes tailored to their 
needs and staffed by persons adequately trained in dealing with young persons.  A multidisciplinary 
approach is needed, drawing upon the skills of a range of professionals (including teachers, trainers 
and psychologists), in order to respond to the individual needs of juveniles within a secure 
educative and socio-therapeutic environment and offer them a wide range of opportunities to 
demonstrate personal growth and competence acquisition.
