- 77 - 
 The CPT recommends that juveniles not be held at SDKK, but exclusively 
accommodated at a juvenile institution.  
 
 
d.  women prisoners 
 
 
156. The unit for women at SDKK had a capacity of 55 places, plus five disciplinary cells and a 
baby room. The baby room was last used in July 2013 when a baby was allowed to stay with its 
mother for two months. The Prison Supervisory Committee informed the delegation that they had 
repeatedly raised the issue of the development of a specific policy for babies in prison. At the time 
of the visit, no such policy was in place. 
 
In the view of the CPT, the governing principle in all cases must be the welfare of the child.  
This implies in particular that any ante- and post-natal care provided in custody should be 
equivalent to that available in the outside community.  Where babies and young children are held in 
custodial settings, their treatment should be supervised by specialists in social work and child 
development.  The goal should be to produce a child-centred environment, free as far as possible 
from visible signs of incarceration, such as uniforms and jangling keys.  
 
The CPT recommends that an adequate policy on babies in prison be developed 
bearing in mind the above considerations. 
 
 
157. At the time of the visit, there were eight female prisoners. The set-up of the unit remains the 
84
same as that described in the report on the 2007 visit, generally providing satisfactory material 
conditions, although there were complaints of rats and crabs in the block at night. Since the 2007 
visit, the disciplinary cells had been renovated. However, the shower and toilet were too close to 
each other for hygienic conditions to be maintained. 
 
The CPT recommends that the design of the sanitary facilities be changed so that the 
toilet is separate from the shower. 
 
 
158. Activities offered to female prisoners included classes on handicrafts, sewing, manicure, 
pedicure and hairdressing. Some women were offered cleaning jobs for a few hours a day. The 
women complained that they were not offered sufficient schooling opportunities and were not 
adequately prepared for their release. They further expressed dissatisfaction with medical care and a 
lack of psychological support.  
 
Women deprived of their liberty should enjoy access to meaningful activities (work, 
training, education, sport, etc.). The female prisoners at SDKK should not only be offered activities 
which have been deemed "appropriate" for them (such as sewing and handicrafts), whilst male 
prisoners are offered training of a more vocational nature. In the view of the CPT, such a 
discriminatory approach can only serve to reinforce outmoded stereotypes of the social role of 
women.  
                                                 
84
  See the report on the 2007 visit (CPT/Inf (2008) 2), Part 3, paragraph 47.
