- 78 - 
The CPT recommends that women be offered additional schooling and meaningful 
work opportunities, as well as psychological support, in order to adequately prepare them for 
their release. 
 
 
4. Prison staff 
 
 
159. In 2007, the CPT severely criticised the totally inadequate numbers of prison officers at Bon 
Futuro Prison, creating a situation in which staff were not in control of prisoners within the 
85
establishment. While staffing levels have improved, serious problems with staffing, due to both 
vacancies and high levels of absenteeism, have continued over the years. A serious issue in recent 
years has been the lack of qualified managers in the prison due to a high turnover of staff and 
several vacancies not being filled for extensive periods of time.  
 
The delegation received complaints from staff members, and particularly from 
86
representatives of the trade union ABVO, that changes in political power often led to changes in 
management, creating instability and hampering progress. Another problem was the serious delay in 
the official adoption of the 2009 ‘book of functions’ (functieboek), creating difficulties in 
recruitment in line with the actual need. Since mid-2013, however, key management positions have 
gradually been filled, while technical support staff continue to be sent from the Netherlands.  
 
At the time of the visit, it was reported that the position of Human Resources Manager, 
which had been vacant for more than two years, was going to be filled from 15 May 2014. 
Management of human resources had been minimal with little vision on how to address the serious 
problems of staff attendance. The delegation found, for example, that data entry with regard to staff 
absence was several months behind and little had been done in recent years to motivate staff and 
87
address concerns.  
 
The CPT recommends that the newly appointed Human Resources Manager urgently 
address the above-mentioned shortcomings. It further recommends that the 2009 book of 
functions be adopted as a matter of urgency. 
 
 
160. Professionalisation of staff should see the role of a prison officer evolving from that of 
essentially a “turn-key” with no responsibility other than that of static security. Instead, prison 
officers should be encouraged to extend their role into interacting positively with inmates, taking 
part in rehabilitation programmes and being an integral element in a multi-disciplinary approach 
towards prisoners’ welfare. This would not only provide a far more challenging and interesting job 
for the prison officers but it would also address the rehabilitation aspect of prison which has to date 
been neglected. Of course, this would necessitate introducing far more training for those prison 
officers capable and willing to take up this additional role. 
 
  
                                                 
85
  See the report on the 2007 visit (CPT/Inf (2008) 2), Part 3, paragraph 53. 
86
  ABVO stands for Algemene Bond van Overheidspersoneel (civil service union). 
87
  The Quality and Auditing Manager had initiated an investigation into absenteeism due to illness, but also 
found that it was very hard to address the problem when up-to-date data was not available. Further, a draft 
protocol to address absenteeism had been developed, but had long been awaiting adoption. At the time of the 
visit, it had not yet been adopted.
