- 79 - 
In the light of the above remarks, the CPT welcomes the large scale retraining of 140 prison 
‘guards’ into prison ‘officers’ and recommends that all prison officers be offered regular in-
service training. 
 
 
5. Health-care services 
 
 
161. The CPT recalls that the task of prison health-care services should not be limited to treating 
sick prisoners. They should also be entrusted with responsibility for social and preventive medicine. 
In particular, a prison health-care service should ensure that information about transmissible 
diseases is regularly circulated, to both prisoners and prison staff. Suicide prevention is another 
matter falling within the purview of a prison’s health-care service. Further, it lies with prison 
health-care services to supervise catering arrangements (quantity, quality, preparation and 
distribution of food) and conditions of hygiene. Provision of medical, nursing and technical staff, as 
well as premises, installations and equipment, should be geared accordingly. 
 
 The findings of the 2014 visit demonstrate that there remain a number of important 
structural deficiencies in the provision of health care to prisoners. 
 
 
a. staffing, premises, financing and organisation 
 
 
162. The medical service at SDKK was staffed by two part-time doctors ensuring a doctor’s 
88
presence only between 10 a.m. and 2.30 p.m. on weekdays. Outside these hours they are on call 
on a rota basis. This is totally insufficient for a prison with an operating capacity of more than 400 
places. At a minimum, the prison should benefit from the equivalent of a full-time doctor. 
Moreover, only three of the seven full-time nursing positions were filled, since four nurses left in 
2012; one of the three will retire in 2015. A dentist visits twice a week from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m.  
 
The lack of staff meant that the shift system in place at the time of the visit resulted in a 
situation where no health-care staff were present at the prison between the hours of 6 p.m. and 8 
a.m. on weekdays, and for the entire weekend.  
 
A psychiatrist attended SDKK (apart from FOBA, see paragraphs 172 and 173) one day a 
week, which is insufficient for a population of more than 330 prisoners, many of who have mental 
health issues. Prisoners did not benefit from psychological care (one psychologist attended only the 
FOBA unit). In the CPT’s view, an establishment of the size of SDKK should be able to rely on the 
services of at least one full-time psychologist.  
 
The CPT calls upon the Curaçao authorities to ensure that efforts be made to secure 
the equivalent of at least one full-time doctor at SDKK and that steps be taken to fill the 
vacant posts for nurses. 
 
The CPT further recommends that steps be taken to ensure that a member of the 
health-care staff is present every day, including at weekends, and that someone qualified to 
provide first aid always be present in the prison, including at night. 
                                                 
88
  One doctor visits the prison on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, the other doctor on Tuesdays and 
Thursdays.
