- 80 - 
In addition, the CPT recommends that a full-time psychologist be recruited as soon as 
possible for SDKK and that the availability of the psychiatrist be increased in order to ensure 
appropriate psychological and psychiatric care for prisoners.  
 
 
163. The premises of the medical service at SDKK comprise a nursing station, a GP’s surgery, a 
dentist’s surgery, an examination room and a small in-patient ward with three beds. As regards 
equipment, the delegation noted that the medical service did not have an ECG or a defibrillator at 
the time of the visit.  
 
The CPT recommends that a defibrillator and ECG be purchased. 
 
 
164. The medical service suffers from serious financial insecurity, leading to extreme delays in 
payment of staff, the laboratory and the pharmacy. One dentist had resigned as a result of non-
payment, while the current dentist stated that he had not been paid for six months and one doctor 
stated that he had not been paid for 18 months. Other visiting health-care staff, such as the 
psychologist, psychiatrist, physiotherapist and dietician had also not been paid for periods of more 
than one year. The dietician had stopped visiting SDKK as a result of non-payment. For the same 
reason, the pharmacy had halted the supply of medicines for a number of days in December 2012, 
and in 2014 the laboratory had refused to perform tests for SDKK for four weeks. Appointments 
with external specialists were also postponed at times due to the inability of SDKK to pay for the 
treatment. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities take the necessary steps, including 
at management level, to ensure the financial security of the medical service in order to 
guarantee prisoners a minimum standard of continuity of care. In this connection, 
consideration might be given to developing a closer partnership with the Ministry of Health, 
with a view to improving quality control and access to health care. 
 
 
165. The delegation received a number of complaints regarding a delay in access to health care. 
From the moment a request to see a nurse or doctor was filed to the time they had their consultation, 
several weeks could pass.   
 
In order to assess the accessibility of health care and the adequacy of response to requests, 
the time between filing a request and the actual visit to the doctor and start of treatment should be 
monitored. 
 
The CPT recommends that steps be taken to ensure prompt access to health care for 
prisoners.
