- 81 - 
166. Regarding the administration of the medical service, the delegation observed that 
consultation requests, medical information and treatment were kept in separate files, rather than 
keeping them together in a single patient medical file. Further, information regarding treatment and 
findings by external specialists was not kept at all. There was also no clear order (for example 
chronological) in the files and there was no electronic record-keeping. The delegation found that the 
administration of medical files and data did not allow a clear overview on the quality of care.  
 
The CPT recommends that the administration of the medical service be reorganised, 
ensuring that all relevant information in relation to a patient can be found in his or her 
personal medical file. 
 
 
b. medical screening, recording of injuries and confidentiality 
 
 
167. Prompt medical screening of newly arrived prisoners is essential to prevent the spread of 
transmissible diseases and for recording injuries in good time. Medical screening can also be used 
to identify mental illness, addictions and dietary needs.  The CPT noted that medical screening was 
generally carried out days, weeks, and even months after the prisoner’s arrival, with some prisoners 
claiming that they were never checked at all; this is not acceptable. Further, the screening generally 
only consisted of an interview on the personal and family history of diseases and upon suspicion of 
HIV or hepatitis C or B, blood samples were taken and sent to the laboratory, with the consent of 
the prisoner. 
 
89
The CPT reiterates its recommendation that every newly admitted prisoner be 
properly interviewed and physically examined by a medical doctor (or by a fully qualified 
nurse reporting to a doctor) as soon as possible after his or her admission; save for 
exceptional circumstances, the interview/examination should be carried out within 24 hours.  
 
 
168. The delegation noted that no guidelines or procedures exist at SDKK for the systematic 
identification of ill-treatment. The CPT has consistently pointed out that prison health-care services 
can make a significant contribution to the prevention of ill-treatment of detained persons through, 
inter alia, the systematic recording of injuries, whether vis-à-vis new arrivals or following a violent 
episode in prison.  
 
The CPT recommends that measures be taken to ensure that the record drawn up 
after the medical examination of a prisoner – whether newly arrived or following a violent 
incident in prison – contains:  
 
(i) an account of statements made by the person which are relevant to the medical 
examination (including his/her description of his/her state of health and any allegations 
of ill-treatment);  
(ii) a full account of objective medical findings based on a thorough examination;  
(iii) the doctor’s observations in the light of i) and ii) indicating the consistency 
between any allegations made and the objective medical findings.  
 
 
                                                 
89
  See the report on the 2007 visit (CPT/Inf (2008) 2), Part 3, paragraph 56.
