- 82 - 
Recording of the medical examination in cases of traumatic injuries should be made on 
a special form provided for this purpose, with "body charts" for marking traumatic injuries 
that will be kept in the medical file of the prisoner. If any photographs are made, they should 
be filed in the medical record of the inmate concerned. In addition, documents should be 
compiled systematically in a special trauma register where all types of injuries should be 
recorded. 
 
The results of every examination, including the above-mentioned statements and the 
doctor’s opinions/observations, should be made available to the prisoner and, with the consent 
of the prisoner, to his or her lawyer. Further, the existing procedures be reviewed in order to 
ensure that whenever injuries are recorded which are consistent with allegations of 
ill-treatment made by a prisoner (or which, even in the absence of allegations, are indicative 
of ill-treatment), the report is immediately brought to the attention of the relevant prosecutor 
regardless of the wishes of the person concerned. 
 
 
169. As regards medical confidentiality, the CPT’s delegation found that it was partially 
respected. It appeared that medical examinations generally took place out of the hearing and sight of 
custodial staff and that medical documentation was only accessible to health-care staff. However, 
prisoners requesting medical care had to submit a request form to a prison officer who passed it on 
to the medical service. Prisoners were obliged to indicate a reason for their request but no envelopes 
were provided, which meant that the prisoner’s medical confidentiality was not guaranteed.  
 
 The CPT recommends that appropriate steps be taken to ensure that prisoners are 
able to have access to the prison’s health-care service on a confidential basis, not exposing 
medical information to non-medical staff.  
 
 
170. The delegation observed that the in-patient ward was used at times to accommodate 
prisoners who had no medical indication but who were segregated since they were at risk among the 
general population. 
  
The CPT recommends that placements in the in-patient ward of the prison be made 
exclusively on the basis of medical criteria, by decision of the responsible medical 
professionals. 
 
 
c. deaths in custody 
 
171. In 2013, a 36-year old woman prisoner died from cardiomyopathy after having waited for 
several hours before the doctor came to see her.  
 
Deaths in custody should systematically be the subject of an investigation, in order to 
establish the cause of death, identify possible criminal and/or disciplinary responsibility and 
ascertain whether there are lessons to be learned for the future as regards operating procedures. 
Such investigations should always include an autopsy.  
 
The CPT was informed that an investigation had indeed been carried out into this death 
in 2013. The CPT would like to receive the outcome of this inquiry, including the autopsy 
report.
