- 83 - 
d. FOBA 
 
 
172. The forensic psychiatric support unit (forensische observatie- en begeleidingsafdeling or 
FOBA) continued to offer good material conditions in the two-storey building, as well as a positive 
atmosphere. FOBA accommodates remand prisoners for observation purposes upon order of the 
investigating judge, as well as sentenced prisoners who have been diagnosed with serious mental 
disorders.  However, it appeared that FOBA also continued to be used to hold prisoners considered 
to be at risk among the general population, particularly juveniles. At the time of the visit, FOBA 
had a capacity of 23 beds; occupancy on the first day of the visit was 19, of which 17 had been 
diagnosed with a psychiatric disorder and two others were juveniles (15 and 16 years old) who were 
90
placed there by order of the prosecutor.  
 
The CPT recommends that placements at FOBA are exclusively made on the basis of 
medical criteria, by decision of the responsible psychiatrist.  
 
 
173. As regards treatment, the delegation found that the unit was well-managed and adequately 
equipped. Individual care plans were found in the medical files and patients were involved in the 
development together with the mentor, who is a member of the prison staff allocated to FOBA. The 
stock of medication was very good, with a wide range of new generation medication.  
 
Further, a psychologist and a psychiatrist visit three mornings a week and are on call 24/7 
for consultations regarding FOBA patients. Every Friday, a nurse prepares the medication for each 
patient, which is then distributed by prison officers. A social worker visits once a week and a nurse 
or a doctor visits the unit when somatic care is needed. The unit is run by prison officers and 
medical staff are only present at the times indicated above. The prison staff at FOBA were found to 
be dedicated and very well trained. 
 
The CPT recommends that medication is distributed exclusively by medical staff. 
 
 
174. The delegation was informed that instances of forced medication rarely occur, but when the 
need arises, assistance is called in from the internal assistance team (IBT) to keep a patient under 
control. In the CPT’s view, forced medication should always be administered in a hospital setting. 
 
The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities take the necessary steps to ensure 
that forced medication is never administered in a prison setting and that alternatives be put in 
place, surrounded by appropriate safeguards. 
 
 
175. As regards the regime, patients are offered outdoor exercise for four hours  a day (two in the 
morning and two in the afternoon) and have access to a range of activities, including sports three 
times a week, weekly music classes and other lessons including computer and social skills, 
gardening and spiritual formation.  
 
 
  
                                                 
90
  These juveniles had initially been placed at the Judicial Youth Institute, but after several escapes the prosecutor 
decided they should be moved to SDKK; due to their age, they were then placed in FOBA.
