- 84 - 
176. Two of the cells at FOBA were used for suicide watch. The delegation considered the cells 
to be inadequate for the purposes of holding a person deemed to be at risk of suicide, as such cells 
should have all ligature points removed. Further, it was possible for other prisoners to engage with 
those on suicide watch through the metal bar doors, creating a possibility for items to be provided to 
them which could be used to harm themselves.  
 
The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities take steps to remove all ligature 
points from the cells and to ensure that other prisoners cannot engage with prisoners held in 
these cells. Further, the CPT would like to receive confirmation that the suicide watch cell at 
the unit for women prisoners remains out of service as it was considered unsuitable for such a 
purpose. 
 
 
177. The CPT notes that while the unit indeed appeared to provide a safe environment for the 
prisoners who were accommodated there, the unit does not function as a proper psychiatric 
institution appropriate for offenders who have been ordered to undergo psychiatric treatment. Its 
location, within a prison environment, and its staffing cannot be considered as adequate for such 
patients. At the same time, however, the management of the only psychiatric hospital in Curaçao, 
Klínika Capriles, have indicated that they feel underequipped to accommodate particularly 
dangerous forensic psychiatric patients (see paragraph 211). Further, the new Criminal Code 
provides for the sentence of placement in a psychiatric hospital or placement at the disposal of the 
Government, including confinement in a custodial clinic (the so-called TBS order).  
 
The CPT would like to receive the comments of the Curaçao authorities on this matter. 
 
 
6. Other issues 
 
 
a. discipline 
 
 
178. Disciplinary sanctions are regulated in Chapter X of the National Ordinance on the Prison 
System (Prison Law) and Paragraph 11 of the Prison Regulation. Available sanctions according to 
Article 36 of the Prison Law are: solitary confinement, deprivation of the right to receive visitors 
and send and receive letters, a fine or a warning. The maximum period of solitary confinement is set 
at two weeks, while the maximum restriction on contact with the outside world is four weeks. A 
protocol on the disciplinary process provided to the delegation added the possible punishments of 
being denied to work for a maximum of three weeks and being denied permission to buy articles 
from the canteen for a maximum period of four weeks.  
 
It was difficult for the delegation to gain a clear overview of the application of disciplinary 
measures, due to the absence of any register. Nevertheless, it appeared from files that procedures 
were generally respected. The Prison Supervisory Committee, however, informed the delegation 
that it regularly observed different disciplinary measures being imposed for similar infractions. It 
had suggested the introduction of equal punishment for comparable situations and better 
explanations for the imposition of a certain punishment within the disciplinary decision.
