- 85 - 
The CPT would like to receive the comments of the Curaçao authorities on this matter. 
It further recommends that steps be taken to ensure that the documentation and registers 
concerning disciplinary sanctions are properly maintained, accurately record the times of 
beginning and ending of the measure, and reflect all other aspects of custody (in particular, 
the precise location where a prisoner has been held). 
 
 
179. Complaints regarding disciplinary decisions, placement in segregation or denied requests for 
91
segregation can be addressed to the Prison Supervisory Committee’s Complaints Committee. In 
2013, this Committee received 15 complaints, of which seven were upheld, some on formal 
grounds, such as incomplete disciplinary decisions or investigation files. 
 
The Prison Supervisory Committee informed the delegation that disciplinary measures often 
included being denied the possibility to work. When a disciplinary measure was annulled following 
appeal, prisoners were often not given back their former work, as it would already have been 
redistributed to another prisoner. 
 
The CPT recommends that measures be taken to ensure that those who have been 
denied work as part of a disciplinary decision, are reinstated or otherwise compensated in 
order to redress the consequences of an annulled decision, in line with Article 44(5) of the 
National Ordinance on the Prison System. 
 
 
180. The CPT has further noted that solitary confinement was invariably accompanied by the 
corollary punishment of withdrawal of permission to use the telephone and to receive visits. The 
Committee has stated clearly that prisoners undergoing a punishment of solitary confinement as a 
disciplinary sanction should never be totally deprived of contacts with their families and that any 
restrictions on such contacts should be imposed only where the offence relates to such contacts. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities take the necessary steps to comply 
with such an approach. 
 
 
181. On a more positive note, the delegation found the refurbishment of the disciplinary cells in 
Block 6 to be a vast improvement of the situation prevailing at the time of the 2007 visit, providing 
better hygiene, sanitary facilities and access to natural light through the installation of new 
windows. The cells had not yet been brought back into service at the time of the visit. 
 
 The CPT would receive confirmation that these disciplinary cells have been brought 
back into service.    
 
  
                                                 
91
  Article 40 of the National Ordinance on the Prison System.
