- 86 - 
92
182. The riot-team that was in place in 2007 has been replaced with an internal support team 
(intern bijstandsteam or IBT), consisting of 30 regular guards who have been given this added 
responsibility. This is a much better approach. The members of this team have been trained in the 
Netherlands. The IBT is deployed once or twice a month for cell searching operations. While the 
delegation did not receive any complaints of physical ill-treatment by the IBT, it did hear several 
allegations of deliberate destruction of possessions in cells when this team was carrying out the 
searches. The delegation was informed that members of the Prison Supervisory Committee were in 
theory called when a search was going to be carried out. In practice, however, it had not always 
been possible for a Commissioner to be present for monitoring purposes, often due to late 
notifications. 
 
Planned interventions of this type should be video recorded (e.g. with tactical cameras as 
part of the equipment of the prison officers concerned) and a prisoner from the cell being searched 
should be present to ensure the search is carried out correctly. 
 
 The CPT recommends that a comprehensive protocol for cell searches be drawn up, 
taking into account the above remarks. 
 
 
183.   In the report on the 2007 visit, the CPT recommended that the authorities of the 
Netherlands Antilles review the role of prison doctors in relation to disciplinary matters in order to 
93
ensure that they are no longer tasked with approving prisoners’ placement in a disciplinary cell. 
This situation remained unchanged at the time of the 2014 visit. 
 
A prison doctor acts as a patient's personal doctor. Consequently, in the interests of 
safeguarding the doctor/patient relationship, he should not be asked to certify that a prisoner is fit to 
undergo punishment.  
 
The CPT recommends once again that the role of prison doctors and nurses in relation 
to disciplinary matters be reviewed, in the light of the above remarks. In so doing, regard 
should be had to the European Prison Rules (in particular, Rule 43.2) and the comments 
th
made by the Committee in its 15 General Report (see paragraph 53 of CPT/Inf (2005) 17). 
 
 
184. As regards the existing arrangements for urine tests at SDKK, the CPT considers that urine 
sample collection and testing for control purposes is essentially a non-medical task that can affect 
the therapeutic relationship with patients when carried out by health-care staff. For this reason, 
health-care staff should not be involved in the collection and testing of urine samples for control 
purposes (i.e. drug abuse). At the same time, staff carrying out urine tests should receive 
appropriate training, and such tests should be carried out in a place which is distinctly different 
from the premises utilised by prison medical staff.  
 
 The CPT recommends that the necessary steps be taken to end the involvement of 
health-care staff in carrying out urine tests for control purposes, in the light of the above 
remarks. 
 
 
                                                 
92
  In 2007, the delegation received a number of allegations of physical ill-treatment by the Correctional 
Emergency Response Team. See the report on the 2007 visit (CPT/Inf (2008) 2), Part 3, paragraphs 41 to 44. 
93
  See the report on the 2007 visit (CPT/Inf (2008) 2), Part 3, paragraph 59.
