- 87 - 
b. segregation of prisoners  
 
 
185. At the time of the visit, several prisoners who needed to be segregated for their own 
protection or the protection of others, were held at unsuitable locations. The delegation was shown a 
newly renovated block consisting of two floors with nine cells each, one floor for disciplinary 
purposes and the other for segregation. The delegation was informed that the second floor could 
also be used for protection purposes. The high security unit in Block 6, also used for segregation, 
was found by the delegation to be in a poor state of repair and in need of renovation. 
 
Every prison system has prisoners who may require protection from other prisoners. This 
may be because of the nature of their offence, their co-operation with the criminal justice 
authorities, inter-gang rivalry, debts outside or inside the prison or the general vulnerability of the 
person. While many prisoners can be managed in the general prison population in these 
circumstances, the risk to some is such that the prison can only discharge its duty of care to the 
individuals by keeping them apart from all other prisoners. This may be done at the prisoner’s own 
request or at the instigation of management when it is deemed necessary. States have an obligation 
to provide a safe environment for those confined to prison and should attempt to fulfil this 
obligation by allowing as much social interaction as possible among prisoners, consistent with the 
maintenance of good order. 
 
The CPT considers that prisoners placed in administrative solitary confinement for good 
order or protection should have an individual regime plan, geared to addressing the reasons for the 
measure. This plan should attempt to maximise contact with others – staff initially, but as soon as 
practicable with appropriate other prisoners – and provide as full a range of activities as is possible 
to fill the days.  
 
The CPT would like to receive confirmation that this new discipline and segregation 
block is now operational. It recommends that the Curaçao authorities draw up a policy for 
managing persons who have been placed under protection in the light of the above remarks. 
 
 
c. complaints and inspection procedures 
 
 
186. Effective complaints and inspection procedures are basic safeguards against ill-treatment in 
prisons. Prisoners should have avenues of complaint open to them, both within and outside the 
prison system, and be entitled to confidential access to an appropriate authority. In addition to 
addressing the individual case involved, the CPT considers that a careful analysis of complaints can 
be a useful tool in identifying issues to be addressed at a general level. 
 
The complaints procedure at SDKK prescribes that prisoners should first attempt to resolve 
any complaint ‘informally’ by addressing prison staff. If this effort fails, the prisoner may receive a 
grievance form and submit this to the Prison Grievance Coordinator, within 20 days of the alleged 
incident. The Coordinator shall assign each request or grievance for investigation and response 
preparation and present a proposed solution/decision to the Director for approval. This should be 
finalised within 20 working days of receiving the complaint.
