- 88 - 
In addition to receiving complaints regarding disciplinary measures and segregation 
decisions (see paragraph 179) the Prison Supervisory Committee has put in place a system of 
“Commissioner of the Month” ensuring that one or more Commissioners are appointed for two-
week terms to perform inspections in the prison and to speak with prisoners and receive complaints. 
These complaints are addressed with prison management and, if they are of a more serious nature, 
they are included in the annual report to prison management and the Minister of Justice. There is no 
other external body to which prisoners can address formal complaints.  
 
In the course of the visit, several prisoners told the delegation that they did not make use of 
the complaints system as they had no confidence in it. Given the absence of a complaints register, it 
was difficult for the delegation to assess the effectiveness of the complaints system in place.  
 
The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities review the current system of 
complaints taking into account the above remarks and introduce a complaints register. 
 
 
187. Several prisoners complained that they were not properly informed of decision-making 
regarding conditional release (voorwaardelijke invrijheidstelling) or electronic monitoring. They 
stated that they were informed very close to, or even on the expected day, that they were not being 
granted release, due to their behaviour in prison or other factors. The result was severe frustration 
among prisoners.  
 
The CPT recommends that mechanisms be put in place to ensure timely and 
transparent decision-making with regard to conditional release and electronic monitoring. 
Further, prisoners should be informed clearly and in due time of the outcome of such 
decisions. 
 
 
188. The Prison Supervisory Committee carries out regular visits to all sections of the prison, 
reporting any concerns directly to prison management and issuing an annual report including 
specific recommendations, based on observations of Commissioners and complaints heard by 
prisoners. Prison management should report to the Minister of Justice within three months of 
94
receiving the annual report on measures taken to implement the recommendations. The delegation, 
however, was informed by the Committee that several recommendations that had been made 
repeatedly over the preceding years had remained unimplemented.  
 
The CPT would like to receive the comments from the Curaçao authorities on this 
issue. It would also like to receive the response by prison management to the 2013 Annual 
Report of the Prison Supervisory Committee.  
 
  
                                                 
94
  Article 47(3) of the 1999 Prison Regulation.
