- 90 - 
C. Juvenile Youth Institute Curaçao 
 
 
1. Preliminary remarks 
 
 
190. Juveniles deprived of their liberty by a court order or following a sentence for a criminal 
offence may be placed in either SDKK or the Judicial Youth Institute Curaçao (Justitiële Jeugd 
95 96
Inrichting Curaçao or JJIC ). The CPT considers that juveniles should not be held in prison but 
in a facility designed to meet their specific needs. In this respect, SDKK is totally inappropriate for 
holding juveniles (see also paragraph 155). 
 
 
191.  The JJIC is an educational and correctional institute for young people. At the time of the 
visit, it consisted of a campus area with several open departments, located at the Kaya Brudernan di 
Dongen, and a closed department, at the Rembrandtstraat, next to the drug rehabilitation centre of 
the Brasami Foundation. The delegation focused on the closed department which was 
accommodating eight juveniles for an official capacity of twelve places. However, as two cells were 
out of order the actual capacity was eight. 
 
 
192. Juveniles can be sentenced to placement in the closed department of JJIC on the basis of 
Section 7 of Title X of the 2011 Criminal Code of Curaçao, placement in a youth institution 
(Plaatsing in een inrichting voor jeugdigen or Pij). Article 1:165 sets the duration of juvenile 
detention at a maximum of twelve months for children aged 12 to 16. For children between 16 and 
18, the maximum is 24 months, and 4 years in case of crimes that carry a sentence of twenty-four 
97
years or life. Article 1:166 provides that a sentence of juvenile detention shall be enforced in a 
separate facility for juvenile detention. If the juvenile has become an adult before the start of his 
sentence, he/she shall be placed in a regular prison instead. At the time of the visit, three juveniles 
at JJIC continued to be detained under the old TBR (placement at the disposal of the government) 
measure, which no longer exists in the new Criminal Code.   
 
 
193. At the time of the visit, a discrete closed department with eight new single-occupancy cells 
located next to the open JJIC departments was being built to provide better material conditions for 
juvenile offenders. More importantly, however, this facility should function with a child-centred 
approach, based upon working intensively with the juveniles to provide them with the necessary 
skills to reintegrate into society upon release.  
  
                                                 
95
   Previously Gouvernements Opvoedingsgesticht or GOG. 
96
  Juveniles with a severe drug addiction could also be ordered to undergo addiction treatment at the Brasami 
Foundation. This facility, however, was not visited by the CPT’s delegation.  
97
  There are no special provisions for young adults aged between 18 and 24; they are sentenced as adults, while 
in theory all undergoing a special regime within the JoVo section at SDKK. In practice, however, this regime 
is not always fully in place.
