- 91 - 
The delegation was also informed of plans to construct a whole new juvenile detention 
facility at the campus location, envisaging a total of 98 beds, with the creation of a capacity of 24 
places in the initial phase. While welcoming the conceptual approach, the CPT would question the 
need for so many places for juvenile offenders given existing numbers were around 10. Once such a 
facility is built, the temptation will be to fill the whole unit, placing an overemphasis on detention 
of juveniles. This would be in contradiction to one of the cardinal principles enshrined in the United 
98 99
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and in the European Rules for juvenile offenders 
that juveniles should only be deprived of their liberty as a last resort and for the shortest possible 
100
period of time.  
 
 The CPT would appreciate the comments of the Curaçao authorities on this matter.  
 
 
194. At the outset, it should be noted that the delegation did not hear any allegations of physical ill-
treatment by staff at JJIC. Some juveniles, however, did allege verbally aggressive behaviour by 
security staff. 
 
The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities deliver the clear message to staff at 
JJIC that all forms of ill-treatment, including verbal abuse, are not acceptable and will be the 
subject of sanctions. 
 
 
2. Conditions of detention 
 
 
195. Material conditions at the Rembrandtstraat building were not good. The six double-occupancy 
cells (measuring some 20 m² and equipped with a bed and some shelves) were in a poor state of 
repair. The cells had limited access to natural light and poor ventilation and suffered frequent 
sewage and sanitary problems. The cells were sombre and smelly, the flush on the toilet did not 
work, and the mattresses were filthy. The exercise yard was covered, and young persons had no 
view of the sky and limited access to natural light.  
 
 
196. The delegation was particularly concerned by the regime in place at JJIC. Hypothetical 
schedules with activities including education, sports and recreation existed. However, the juveniles 
all complained of the complete lack of purposeful activities, stating they would at most have one 
hour of education per week and one music class. The sports field was not in use, as it was 
considered an escape risk.  
 
  
  
                                                 
98
  See articles 3 and 37.b of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. 
99
  See rules 5 and 10 of the European Rules for juvenile offenders subject to sanctions or measures 
(Recommendation CM/Rec(2008)11). 
100
  See also the 1985 United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice 
(“Beijing Rules”), the 1990 United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty 
(“Havana Rules”) and the 1990 United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency 
(“Riyadh Guidelines”).
