- 92 - 
 It appeared that lack of staff, security concerns and limited resources often resulted in 
activities being cancelled. Furthermore, when juveniles are placed at JJIC they first needed to be 
assessed and were not allowed out of their cells during the first month. Afterwards, they were 
progressively allowed more time outdoors, up to five hours per day.  
 
 The state of affairs at the closed department of the juvenile judicial institute was 
totally unacceptable at the time of the visit (see paragraph 201). Children who have been 
deprived of their liberty should be provided with an extensive programme of activities (education, 
vocational, recreational and sports) for at least eight hours a day with an individual sentence plan 
drawn up and reviewed on a regular basis, with the involvement of the child. They should also be 
accommodated in appropriate material conditions.  
 
 
3. Staff 
 
 
197. The custody and care of juveniles deprived of their liberty is a particularly challenging task. 
The staff called upon to fulfil that task should be carefully selected for their personal maturity and 
ability to cope with the challenges of working with - and safeguarding the welfare of - this age 
group. More particularly, they should be committed to working with young people, and be capable 
of guiding and motivating the juveniles in their charge. All such staff, including those with purely 
custodial duties, should receive professional training, both during induction and on an ongoing 
basis, and benefit from appropriate external support and supervision in the exercise of their duties.  
 
 Security staff inside JJIC were deployed from the prison, whereas private security guards were 
responsible for perimeter security. None of these guards had undergone any special training to deal 
with juveniles. Six full-time teachers and two social workers are employed at JJIC, but they are also 
responsible for working with children in the open sections. 
 
 The CPT recommends that all staff working with juveniles receive specific training for 
working with juveniles in the light of the above remarks. 
 
 
4. Health care 
 
 
198.  There were no medical staff based at JJIC. Doctors and nurses from SDKK were responsible 
for the health care, visiting only when necessary, while a psychologist visits JJIC for three hours a 
week. 
 
The CPT recommends that someone qualified to provide first aid should always be 
present at the establishment, including at night. 
 
 
199. Prompt medical screening of newly admitted juveniles is essential to prevent the spread of 
transmissible diseases and for recording injuries in good time (see also paragraph 167). Medical 
screening can also be used to identify mental illness, addictions and dietary needs. Juveniles 
arriving to JJIC do not undergo any medical screening. A doctor or nurse is only called in when this 
is deemed necessary.
