- 93 - 
The CPT recommends that every newly admitted juvenile be properly interviewed and 
physically examined by a medical doctor (or by a fully qualified nurse reporting to a doctor) 
as soon as possible after his or her admission; save for exceptional circumstances, the 
interview and examination should be carried out within 24 hours. 
 
 
5. Other issues 
 
 
200. Possible disciplinary sanctions included confinement to the juvenile’s own cell or to the 
disciplinary cell (number four). The cell measured 8 m² and was equipped with a set of double bunk 
beds. It was dirty and dark, with very limited access to natural light and poor ventilation. The 
maximum placement in the disciplinary cell was three days which, according to the juveniles, was 
not exceptional. This was not an appropriate place to hold juveniles.  
 
 The CPT has very strong reservations as concerns any form of solitary confinement of 
juveniles as this can compromise their physical and/or mental integrity. To this end, it considers that 
a juvenile should never be placed in solitary confinement for disciplinary purposes for a period 
101
exceeding three days, and preferably for period not lasting more than a few hours. 
 
 The delegation further noted a lack of safeguards for the punishment of juveniles, notably 
when they are placed in the isolation cell. There were no procedures in place governing such a 
placement; the measure appeared to be arbitrarily applied and for punitive reasons with no proper 
disciplinary process and no proper recording of the measure in a dedicated register. This is 
unacceptable. 
 
 The delegation was also informed that due to the lack of specialised training for the staff, the 
police were called in on occasion to re-establish order. Such a practice should be ended. 
 
 The CPT recommends that clear guidelines be developed regarding disciplinary 
sanctions, ensuring a minimal resort to the punishment of solitary confinement. Further, 
safeguards should be put in place as well as a recording system which can be used to monitor 
the application of sanctions. 
 
 
201. Had it not been for the fact that a new establishment was close to being opened, with the 
promise of a new regime and approach, the delegation would have recommended the immediate 
closure of the Rembrandtstraat unit. By letter of 24 September 2014, the Curaçao authorities 
confirmed that the new unit became operational on 28 August 2014 and that the facility at the 
Rembrandtstraat is no longer being used for the detention of children. Further, information is 
provided on the increased opportunities for education, work, recreation and outdoor exercise. The 
CPT welcomes this development and would like to receive information on the operation of the 
new unit at the Incastraat, including information on staffing and weekly activities. 
  
                                                 
101 th
  See the 18 General Report on the CPT’s activities – CPT/Inf (2008) 25, paragraph 26.
