- 94 - 
D. Illegalen Barakken Immigration Detention Facility 
 
 
202.  Foreign nationals held under aliens legislation in Curaçao are detained at Illegalen 
Barakken, an immigration detention facility located right next to SDKK. Their detention can be 
ordered, by an inspector of the Curaçao Police Force, responsible for immigration cases. Detention 
is ordered only in combination with an expulsion order, which may be appealed. Responsibility for 
the accommodation and care of immigration detainees was fully transferred from the police to 
SDKK in 2012.  
 
 
203.  There are no specific regulations governing the detention of irregular migrants, resulting in a 
very basic and restrictive regime at Illegalen Barakken. There appeared to be no legal maximum 
period of immigration detention. While the vast majority of detainees only spends up to three days 
in detention, complications with identity documents or inability to pay for a flight ticket could lead 
to detention of several months. The delegation was informed that if a person remained unable to 
afford a flight ticket after approximately five months, the State would pay for the ticket to enable 
deportation. 
 
 The CPT recommends that specific regulations be developed which are appropriate for 
the detention of irregular migrants. Such regulations should include a maximum period of 
detention. Further, if the only reason of failure to deport is the lack of funds for an airfare, 
the CPT recommends that the State provide these funds much earlier in the process.  
 
 
204. Immigration detainees should - in the same way as other categories of persons deprived of 
their liberty - be entitled, as from the outset of their deprivation of liberty, to inform a person of 
their choice of their situation and to have access to a lawyer and a medical doctor. Further, 
immigration detainees should be expressly informed, without delay and in a language they 
understand, of all their rights and the procedure applicable to them. These rights were generally 
respected. However, the CPT’s delegation did note some shortcomings. 
 
 Immigration detainees had a right to inform a person of their choice of their detention, but in 
principle they had to make this call at their own cost. If they did not have money for a phone card, 
they would have to depend on the kindness of a staff member to assist them in this regard. 
Detainees had a right to consult a lawyer at any stage of the proceedings against them, but they had 
no access to free legal aid. Further, while most staff members spoke Spanish (the language of the 
majority of immigration detainees in Curaçao), communication problems could arise when other 
languages were needed. The delegation observed that efforts were being made by staff to explain 
rights and procedures in a language that could be understood. However, written documentation, 
such as the detention and deportation warrants, was only available in Dutch. 
 
 In the CPT’s view irregular migrants should benefit from an effective legal remedy enabling 
them to have the lawfulness of their deprivation of liberty decided speedily by a judicial body. This 
judicial review should entail an oral hearing with legal assistance, provided free of charge for 
persons without sufficient means, and interpretation (if required). 
 
The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities introduce such a legal remedy.
