- 95 - 
Further, the CPT recommends that the right to inform a person of choice be 
guaranteed and that provision be made that costs of this notification are covered by the State. 
 
In addition, all immigration detainees should be expressly informed of their rights and 
the procedure applicable to them in a language they can understand. They should be 
systematically provided with a document setting out this information; the document should be 
available in the languages most commonly spoken by those concerned and, if necessary, the 
services of an interpreter should be made available. 
 
 
205. The premises consisted of three parts; one for the detention of men, one for women and one 
for staff and administration. The detention block for men comprised a multi-occupancy dormitory 
room (60 m²) with 12 beds and a recreation room, divided by the bathroom. The women’s building 
had a dormitory with 14 beds and a bathroom. The buildings and sanitary facilities were in a good 
state of repair and had sufficient access to natural light and adequate ventilation. The delegation 
found that material conditions had improved considerably since the 2007 visit and could generally 
102
be considered as adequate.  
 
 
206. There was, however, a general lack of purposeful activity in the facility. The male ward had a 
recreation room with a television, dominoes and some fitness equipment but this room was locked 
overnight. The female ward had a television in the dormitory itself. There was a possibility to play 
ball games in the fenced area used for outdoor exercise.  
 
 For short stays of up to three days, which, as noted above, is the case for the vast majority of 
persons held at the Illegalen Barakken, the regime could be considered as acceptable. However, in 
respect of persons who have to stay longer, additional measures need to be taken to offer some 
purposeful activities (educational, recreational or vocational).  
 
 The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities develop a range of purposeful 
activities for detained persons at Illegalen Barakken. The longer the period for which persons 
are detained, the more developed should be the activities which are offered to them. 
 
 
207. The prison staff employed at the facility had not received specific training to deal with the 
particular needs of foreign nationals detained under aliens legislation and played a merely 
supervisory role. It should be noted, however, that the delegation had a positive impression of the 
manager of Illegalen Barakken who appeared to be making a genuine effort to ensure adequate 
103
conditions of detention for all detainees.  
 
 The CPT recommends that staff be selected and trained for the specific purpose of 
104
working with irregular migrants.  
 
 
 
                                                 
102
   See the report on the 2007 visit (CPT/Inf (2008) 2), Part 3, paragraphs 7, 32 and 33. 
103
  For example, the manager had informed the CPT delegation that he had drafted new regulations to ensure a 
clear and more appropriate framework for immigration detention.  
104
  See also the report on the 2007 visit (CPT/Inf (2008) 2), Part 3, paragraph 34.
