- 97 - 
E. Klínika Capriles Psychiatric Institution 
 
 
1. Preliminary remarks 
 
 
210. Klínika Capriles, located in Willemstad, is the only psychiatric hospital on the island and 
since 2010 exists as a foundation completely independent of the State. The hospital had 199 beds 
spread across a series of recently built units within a large campus area. The majority of patients 
were accommodated in the three Mediumstay units (52 beds), the two Longstay units Esmeralda 
and Margriet (40 beds) and the Klas Florisol (chronic) unit (54 beds). Involuntary patients were 
placed in the 21-bed Pico Plata unit and in the 32-bed Shortstay unit. There was also a day clinic.  
 
 
211. The management of Klínika Capriles intended to remove all fencing from around the clinic 
and, in this respect, acknowledged that the Pico Plata unit was not designed to accommodate 
particularly dangerous forensic psychiatric patients. Indeed, the CPT’s delegation was informed that 
perhaps the FOBA at SDDK would have to transform a section into a proper psychiatric in-patient 
department.  
 
 The CPT considers that persons requiring psychiatric assessment and/or treatment, whatever 
their status, should be assessed and/or treated in a medical facility. At present, the FOBA cannot be 
considered as a medical facility. 
 
 The CPT would like to be informed about the intentions of the Curaçao authorities 
with regard to the placement of forensic psychiatric patients in the future.  
 
 
212. The CPT’s delegation undertook a targeted visit to the closed Pico Plata unit where 
substance abusers and mentally incapacitated offenders were accommodated. At the time of the 
visit, there were 17 patients. It also had an opportunity to tour the whole campus and to visit the 
short-stay admissions unit. 
 
At the outset, the CPT wishes to state that in the units visited, the delegation noted a caring 
and supportive approach by staff towards patients.  
 
 
2. Patients’ living conditions and treatment 
 
 
213. The Pico Plata unit consists of a single-storey L-shaped building looking out onto an 
enclosed courtyard with a high wall. The building was in a state of disrepair and decay with 
problems of damp walls and crumbling ceilings. The three accommodation units each consisted of 
two small dormitories containing three beds, each with its own sanitary annexe (toilet and shower; a 
couple of the showers lacked curtains), and a common kitchen/dining room area between the two 
dormitories. The dormitories were suitably equipped (bed, personal cupboard, bedside table) but 
rather shabby and provided little personal space; it would be preferable that the dormitories 
accommodate no more than two patients each. The units were all clean. The double- and single-
occupancy rooms were in a similar state.
