- 98 - 
 However, in comparison to the recently-built short-stay unit where all patients had their own 
room, with sanitary annexe, good access to natural light and sufficient ventilation, the conditions in 
Pico Plata could be described as poor. 
 
 The CPT recommends that steps be taken to improve the living conditions of patients 
accommodated in the Pico Plata unit, in the light of the above remarks. It would be preferable 
that accommodation of a similar standard to that available for short-stay patients be provided 
for Pico Plata patients. 
 
 
214. As for treatment, each patient had an individual care plan drawn up which was reviewed on 
a weekly basis by a psychiatrist and adapted to the patient’s needs, with specific goals and planned 
interventions. A broad range of treatment was offered, including pharmacotherapy, individual and 
group psychotherapy, occupational therapy (art, music), group sessions and a range of activities. 
Patients had access to the enclosed garden area, which was equipped with benches, for much of the 
day. 
 
105
 The possibility for PRN medication to be administered to patients was noted by the 
psychiatrist in some of the medical files. However, it had not been applied in respect of the patients 
in Pico Plata.  
 
 
3. Staff 
 
 
215. The hospital had some 250 staff members, including 141 nurses, 17 occupational therapists, 
six psychotherapists, four psychiatrists and a general practitioner. The Pico Plata unit was staffed by 
five nurses from 7 a.m. to 3 p.m., three nurses from 3 p.m. to 11 p.m. and one nurse between 
11 p.m. and 7 a.m. A unit coordinator (trained psychiatric nurse) was present each weekday. There 
was also a guard on duty at all times who could speak to patients but was only authorised to use 
physical force upon the explicit instruction of a nurse. A psychiatrist visited the unit some eight 
hours a week and a psychologist ten hours, and the psychiatrist was on call 24 hours a day.  
 
 The CPT recommends that the staffing levels on the Pico Plata unit be reviewed; in 
particular the presence of the psychiatrist and of the psychologist should be increased. 
 
 
4. Seclusion and means of restraint 
 
 
216. Mechanical means of restraint were not applied at Klínika Capriles. If nurses were unable to 
calm an agitated patient through de-escalation techniques, resort to manual restraint or seclusion 
was possible. Further, medication for rapid tranquillisation was used. In all cases the resort to means 
of restraint and seclusion was reported to a doctor. In the case of seclusion, the delegation was 
informed that the mean time for the measure in 2013 had been 28 hours. During the first four 
months of 2014, there had been 22 cases, the longest of which lasted some 66 hours while 16 lasted 
less than 24 hours. However, very few cases concerned patients from the Pico Plata unit. 
                                                 
105  
 “PRN” stands for pro re nata, a Latin expression for “as the circumstance arises” referring to open-ended 
prescriptions made by treating doctors, for drugs not administered immediately, or on an on-going basis, but 
whenever the nursing staff believe it to be necessary.
