- 99 - 
The seclusion room in Pico Plata was not appropriate for placing patients for extended 
periods and was only used for short time-outs. In each case, the doctor would be informed and the 
measure noted in the individual medical record. If a measure of seclusion was considered necessary 
for a patient from Pico Plata, he would be taken to the recently built admission unit which possessed 
two isolation rooms. Each room was under CCTV and audio surveillance and a nurse visited and 
talked to the patient every 30 minutes. Each patient was provided with rip-proof clothing and a 
blanket. At the end of the period of seclusion, a debriefing would take place. For every instance of 
isolation, the measure was recorded in the patient’s medical file (the time at which the measure 
began and ended; the circumstances of the case; the reasons for resorting to the measure; the name 
of the doctor who ordered or approved it; whether the measure was part of a treatment plan), and a 
central computerised record was also maintained.  
 
The CPT would like to receive a copy of the Klínika Capriles’ policy on restraint, 
including on issues associated with restraint, such as staff training, complaints policy, 
reporting mechanisms and debriefing. 
 
 Further, the CPT would like to receive confirmation that a measure of seclusion is 
always ordered by a doctor and that only in emergency situations is the measure applied by 
nursing staff and a doctor subsequently informed. 
 
 
5. Safeguards 
 
 
a. the initial placement decision and discharge 
 
 
217. The procedure by which involuntary placement is decided should offer guarantees of 
independence and impartiality as well as of objective medical expertise. Leaving aside emergency 
cases, the formal decision to place a person in a psychiatric hospital should always be based on the 
opinion of at least one doctor with psychiatric qualifications, and preferably two, and the actual 
placement decision should be taken by a different body from the one that recommended it. Further, a 
patient must have the right to appeal the measure to a court or mental health tribunal, which should 
see the patient before deciding on the involuntary placement measure if this is possible and not 
detrimental to the person’s health. The patient should also be entitled to legal assistance in such 
proceedings. Where the patient does not appear before the judge, he or she should normally be 
represented by a person acting in his or her interests.
