- 100 - 
218. The involuntary placement procedure at Klínika Capriles is regulated by Section 4 of the 
28 May 2010 Netherlands Antilles National Ordinance concerning the placement and care of 
patients. According to the law, the Minister of Health may authorise an involuntary placement at the 
request of a family member or guardian and based upon the statement of a psychiatrist or a doctor, 
but not the person’s treating doctor, which should have been drawn up within the previous three 
days. The Minister of Health should as far as is possible hear the person concerned as well as a 
family member or guardian. The Minister of Health’s order for involuntary placement is 
communicated to the prosecutor’s office, which must file a request with the court within five weeks 
for a continued involuntary placement for a period not exceeding one year. The prosecutor includes 
the daily observation medical entries of the patient for the first four weeks of hospitalisation, as well 
106
as the statement of the treating psychiatrist. The judge should hear the patient and may also hear 
from other persons working in the hospital. Further extensions of involuntary placement for periods 
of one year are made by the Court upon request of the prosecutor and supported by a statement from 
the treating psychiatrist. The intention of the management of Klínika Capriles had been to recruit a 
non-treating psychiatrist to be responsible for evaluations. The law did not provide for a right to 
legal assistance for patients subjected to involuntary placement. 
 
 Discharge is decided by the Board of the hospital at the request of the patient or of the 
family or guardian, or upon a written statement of the psychiatrist. If a request for discharge is 
rejected, the patient may appeal to the Court. 
 
 The above-mentioned procedures fall short of providing adequate safeguards for patients 
subject to a measure of involuntary placement, notably as regards legal assistance. 
 
The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities review the procedures for 
involuntary placement at Klínika Capriles or any other psychiatric hospital in order to meet 
the standards set out in paragraph 217 above.  
 
More particularly, steps should be taken to ensure that: 
 
 involuntary placement orders should always be based on the opinion of at least one 
doctor with psychiatric qualifications, and preferably two; the need for such placements 
should be reviewed at regular intervals (i.e. initially no longer than every three months); 
 a court should seek an opinion from a psychiatrist outside the hospital concerned in 
the context of involuntary placement decisions or extensions thereof; 
 patients who are admitted to a psychiatric hospital on an involuntary basis have the 
effective right to appeal the measure; 
 the patient concerned receives a copy of any decision on involuntary placement and is 
informed in writing about the reasons for the decision and the avenues/deadlines for 
lodging an appeal; 
 a patient is entitled to legal assistance in the context of involuntary placement 
decisions.  
 
  
                                                 
106
  The hearing may take place in the hospital and it is for the judge to decide whether the patient is fit to be heard 
or not.
