- 101 - 
 
b. safeguards during placement 
 
 
219. At the Klínika Capriles, the involuntary admission of a patient was considered to provide the 
authorisation to administer compulsory treatment.  
 
The CPT has fundamental objections to such an approach. The Committee considers that 
patients should, as a matter of principle, be placed in a position to give their free and informed 
consent to treatment. The admission of a person to a psychiatric establishment on an involuntary basis 
should not be construed as authorising treatment without his or her consent. It follows that every 
patient, whether voluntary or involuntary, should be given the opportunity to refuse treatment or any 
other medical intervention. Any derogation from this fundamental principle should be based upon law 
and only relate to clearly and strictly defined exceptional circumstances. 
Of course, consent to treatment can only be qualified as free and informed if it is based on full, 
accurate and comprehensible information about the patient's condition and the treatment proposed. 
Consequently, all patients should be provided systematically with relevant information about their 
condition and the treatment which it is proposed to prescribe for them. Relevant information (results, 
etc.) should also be provided following treatment. 
 
The CPT recommends that the Curaçao authorities take the necessary steps to recognise 
the principle of free and informed consent to treatment, in the light of the above remarks.  
 
 
220. All patients were provided with a Patient’s Rights Brochure upon admission to Klínika 
Capriles. The policy of the hospital was to move away from ward rules to a focus on the rights of 
patients. The brochure provided, for example, the following rights: 
 The right to quality treatment and care, respecting personal dignity and right to self 
determination. 
 The right to a treatment plan, prepared by the caregiver to the extent possible together with 
the patient, immediately after admission. 
 The right to information and participation in the preparation of the treatment plan. 
 The right to a file and access to the file. To the extent permitted by law, the patient has the 
right to demand that the file or parts of the file be destroyed. 
 The right to confidentiality. In case of involuntary admission, information is provided to the 
legal representative. 
 The rights in case of measures. Specific measures should end as soon as the danger has 
passed. In cases which occur more or less regularly, the measures to be applied will be 
specified in the treatment plan. The measures are: isolation (locked regular room), 
separation (special room), fixation to seat or bed, medication, administration of food and 
liquids. 
 The right to move freely. In case of involuntary admission, this is limited to the hospital 
premises. 
 The right to contact with the outside world. 
 The right to discuss the case with the patient counsellor who may assist in defending the 
patient’s rights. 
 
Patients met by the delegation had been advised of their rights in a language they could 
understand. The CPT endorses such a rights-based approach towards patients.
