- 104 - 
2. Ill-treatment 
 
 
224. Most persons met by the CPT’s delegation stated that they had been treated correctly at the 
time of apprehension. However, a few allegations of ill-treatment by police officers, including of 
juveniles, were received which consisted primarily of punches and kicks to the body. For example, 
a person who was apprehended on 4 April 2014 in St Peter’s stated that he was punched three times 
in the stomach by police officers with his hands cuffed behind his back apparently because they 
thought he was lying. Some allegations of excessive use of force at the time of apprehension were 
also received, including kicks to the legs and body after the person had been handcuffed and was 
lying prone on the ground. Complaints about tight handcuffing were also heard.  
 
 The CPT recommends that senior police officers remind their subordinates at regular 
intervals that ill-treatment is not acceptable and will be punished accordingly. 
 
The Committee further recommends that police officers be regularly reminded, 
through training and instructions, that no more force than is reasonably necessary should be 
used when effecting an apprehension. In particular, police officers must be trained in 
preventing and minimising violence in the context of an apprehension. For cases in which the 
use of force nevertheless becomes necessary, police officers need to be able to apply 
professional techniques which minimise any risk of harm to the persons whom they are 
seeking to apprehend. 
 
 
225. The CPT would also like to receive for the years 2010-2014: 
 
 data on the number of complaints lodged of ill-treatment by police officers and the 
number of criminal/disciplinary proceedings initiated as a result of those complaints; 
 information on the outcome of proceedings and an account of criminal/disciplinary 
sanctions imposed following complaints of ill-treatment. 
 
 
3. Safeguards against ill-treatment 
 
 
226. The CPT attaches particular importance to the right of persons deprived of their liberty to 
inform a close relative or another person of their choice of their situation; the right of access to a 
lawyer; and the right of access to a doctor. These rights should apply from the very outset of the 
person’s deprivation of liberty, i.e. as from the moment when the person is obliged to remain with 
the police. Persons should also be adequately informed of the possibility to avail themselves of 
these rights, and it should be possible to verify the application of these safeguards by consulting 
police custody records. 
 
 
227. Many persons met by the delegation, notably foreign nationals, alleged that they had not 
been able to inform a third person of their detention during the first few days of detention following 
their apprehension by the police. It was not possible to verify any records as to whether the police 
had notified a third person but it appeared that detained persons were not provided with feedback if 
a third party was contacted.
