- 105 - 
The CPT recommends that the Sint Maarten authorities ensure that all persons 
deprived of their liberty by the police, for whatever reason, are granted the right to notify a 
close relative or third party of their choice about their situation as from the very outset of their 
deprivation of liberty. The exercise of this right could be made subject to certain exceptions 
designed to protect the legitimate interests of the police investigation, provided those exceptions 
are clearly circumscribed in law and made subject to appropriate safeguards (e.g. any delay in 
notification of custody to be recorded in writing with the specific reasons therefor and to 
require the approval of a senior police officer unconnected with the case at hand or a public 
prosecutor). 
 
 
228. Article 48 of the CCP provides for the right of access to a lawyer for persons apprehended 
by the police. Further, following the Salduz judgment of the European Court of Human Rights of 27 
116
November 2008 and a judgment of the Supreme Court based upon it, the Public Prosecution 
Service announced a new policy on the presence of a lawyer during interviews. Consequently, all 
persons apprehended must be now informed by an investigating officer, prior to the first interview, 
of his or her right to consult a lawyer before the interview. The lawyer of the suspect’s choice – or 
otherwise the duty lawyer – must be telephoned either by the reporting officer who arrested the 
suspect or by the assistant public prosecutor before whom the suspect was brought after his arrest. 
This is a positive development. 
 
 However, it would appear that in numerous cases detained persons were presented with a 
waiver form to sign declaring that they did not wish to have access to a lawyer before the first 
police interview. Persons met by the delegation stated that they were unsure what they were signing 
and many thought it was the form about their right to a lawyer. Indeed, many persons had only been 
able to contact a lawyer once they were taken before a judge concerning the extension of their 
detention period (i.e. after two days).  
 
 The delegation also met two juveniles who stated that they had not had a lawyer or person of 
trust present when they had been interviewed for the first time by the police. 
 
 One reason presented to the CPT for the delay in access to a lawyer was that legal aid for 
detained persons was only applicable from the moment that persons were brought before a judge to 
have their detention extended (i.e. after two to three days). This deficiency should be remedied. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the Sint Maarten authorities take the necessary steps to 
ensure that all persons are afforded the right of access to a lawyer in practice as from the 
outset of their deprivation of liberty. Such a right should include access to an ex officio lawyer 
if required.  
 
 
  
                                                 
116
  Judgment of 30 June 2009; reference LJN: BH3079.
