- 106 - 
229. Access to a doctor is not a right provided for in the CCP and the Police Code of Conduct 
(Article 17) only places a duty on police officers to consult with a doctor if necessary. Nevertheless, 
in practice, persons detained at Philipsburg Police Station could request access to a doctor or a 
nurse who were on call 24 hours a day. Further, it appeared that the nurse visiting sentenced 
prisoners every day could also examine police detainees. However, there was no screening of 
detained persons and requests to see a doctor were not always followed up promptly. For example, 
the delegation met an elderly man who appeared to have suffered a broken finger at the time of his 
arrest some 10 days prior to the delegation’s visit and who had still not been seen by a doctor or a 
nurse.  
 
The CPT recommends that persons deprived of their liberty by the police be expressly 
guaranteed the right of access to a doctor from the very outset of deprivation of liberty. 
 
The relevant provisions should make it clear that: 
 a request by a detained person to see a doctor should always be granted; it is not 
for police officers, nor for any other authority, to filter such requests; 
 a person taken into police custody has the right to be examined, if he so wishes, by 
a doctor of his own choice, in addition to any medical examination carried out by a 
doctor called by the police (it being understood that an examination by a doctor of 
the detained person’s own choice may be carried out at his own expense); 
 all medical examinations should be conducted out of the hearing and - unless the 
doctor concerned expressly requests otherwise in a given case - out of the sight of 
police staff; 
 the results of every examination, as well as any relevant statements by the detained 
person and the doctor’s conclusions, should be formally recorded by the doctor 
and made available to the detainee and his lawyer; 
 the confidentiality of medical data should be strictly observed, without prejudice to 
the right of the person concerned to make reference to that medical data; 
 the exercise of the right of access to a doctor should be recorded in the custody 
records. 
 
Further, all persons remanded at Philipsburg Police Station should undergo a proper 
medical assessment for as long as it is used as a remand facility. 
 
 
4. Philipsburg Police Station  
 
 
230. Since the 2002 visit, a new police detention facility has been constructed at the back of the 
police station. The facility consists of 12 cells with an official capacity of 26 places. 
 
 At the time of the visit, the detention facility was under the operational responsibility of 
Point Blanche Prison, staffed by four prison officers during the day (7 a.m. to 7 p.m.) and three 
prison officers at night. All persons held by the police for more than a few hours would be 
transferred to this facility. However, the facility was also being used to hold remand and sentenced 
prisoners due to the overcrowding and ongoing renovations at Point Blanche Prison. When the 
delegation visited the facility, it was holding seven persons considered to be under police custody 
(i.e. who had been detained for less than 10 days since their apprehension), three juveniles and 16 
prisoners. Numbers often exceeded the official capacity; for example, there had been 31 persons 
held the night prior to the delegation’s visit.
