- 107 - 
231. The conditions of detention were extremely poor. The cell area was dark and dank; cells had 
little access to natural light and the artificial lighting in the corridors was insufficient for reading 
purposes; there was inadequate ventilation and many of the sanitary annexes in the cells emitted a 
foul smell. In several cells, there was leakage from the sanitary annexes, which were not fully 
partitioned from the rest of the cell. In the larger cells (16 m²) there were two sets of bunk beds for 
four persons but it was quite usual for an additional two or three persons to be kept overnight in 
these cells, sleeping on a mattress on the floor. Many of the mattresses were dirty and worn, or 
consisted of broken pieces of foam held together by a sheet. Moreover, during the first 10 days of 
detention (the period considered as police custody) staff confirmed that detained persons were not 
provided with sheets, a pillow or a towel. A number of persons displayed rashes all over their 
bodies. There were also no call bells in the cells which meant that detained persons had to shout 
repeatedly to attract the attention of staff, often resulting in terse exchanges. 
 
 The situation was exacerbated by the fact that there was no regime in place. Sentenced 
inmates were offered two periods of up to one hour each in a courtyard and those in police custody 
up to one hour. There were no other activities and no access to television or radio. 
 
 Some people had been held in these conditions for several months. 
 
 The CPT recommends that urgent steps be taken to improve the conditions of 
detention at Philipsburg Police Station, in particular: 
 all detained persons should be provided with at least 4 m² of living space per person in 
multi-occupancy cells; 
 all detained persons should be provided with their own bed; 
 all detained persons should be provided with a sheet, pillow and towel from the 
moment they are accommodated in this facility, as well as with hygiene products and 
cleaning materials for the cell; 
 ventilation and access to natural light should be improved; 
 all sanitary annexes should be partitioned up to the ceiling and leaking toilets and 
pipes repaired; 
 all cells should be equipped with a call bell. 
 
Moreover, the CPT recommends that persons should not be detained at Philipsburg 
Police Station in excess of three days and in any event never longer than 10 days. The facility 
is totally inappropriate for holding remand and sentenced prisoners, and the CPT 
recommends that they be moved to alternative accommodation as soon as possible. 
 
 
5. Juveniles in detention 
 
 
232. At the time of the visit, three juveniles were being held in two cells at Philipsburg Police 
Station. One juvenile had spent 56 days in a cell on his own and another some 20 days before the 
third juvenile had arrived a few days prior to the visit. They were provided with maths and English 
classes each morning, although the teacher did not always turn up, and were offered outdoor 
exercise twice a day. They were also brought to the gym at Point Blanche once a week, although 
they found this rather uncomfortable as the older prisoners tried to supply them with marihuana. 
Otherwise, they were confined to their cells for 20 hours a day.
