- 108 - 
The conditions of detention at Philipsburg Police Station were totally inappropriate for 
juveniles. The CPT recommends that alternative arrangements be made to hold juveniles in 
appropriate accommodation whenever it is considered necessary to deprive a juvenile of his 
or her liberty. 
 
 
233. The authorities of Sint Maarten were aware of the need to change this state of affairs. The 
delegation was informed of plans to build a small dedicated unit for the detention of up to 20 boys, 
in two separate sections, one for civil order and one for criminal law offences. The plans appeared 
to be well thought through, with an emphasis on creating a safe environment and rehabilitation 
through providing a full regime of sports, education and vocational activities. Special attention was 
also being taken to recruit the right mix of staff. The CPT welcomes this approach with the proviso 
that every effort should be made to avoid the temptation to fill the unit, especially given that there 
were only a few juveniles in detention in Sint Maarten at the time of the visit.  
 
The delegation was also informed that the intention was to construct a child-friendly three-
cell unit at Philipsburg Station for juveniles which would be separated from the adult area. Juveniles 
would be kept in this unit for the first 10 days of their detention and afterwards transferred to the 
new dedicated juvenile detention unit. The Committee is far more reticent about this project as it 
considers that children should not be held overnight in police stations. It would be far preferable for 
children deprived of their liberty as a last resort to be held in a place commensurate with their 
needs. To this end, it would be preferable that they be accommodated without further delay in the 
new children’s detention unit, where the facilities and staffing will be specifically designed for 
accommodating juveniles.  
 
The CPT would welcome the observations of the Sint Maarten authorities on this 
matter. Further, it would like to be informed of the number of juveniles being held in 
detention at Philipsburg Police Station and/or the new children’s detention unit, for the 
period from October 2014 to April 2015.
