- 109 - 
B. Point Blanche Prison 
 
 
1. Preliminary remarks 
 
 
234. Point Blanche Prison, accessible only by an extremely steep and narrow concrete road, is 
located on a secluded hilltop in the outskirts of Philipsburg. The prison, built in the 1990s, is 
designed on the Panopticon model, although there was a disjuncture between the central observation 
room and the four accommodation wings (eight spurs) which meant that staff could not properly see 
117
what prisoners were doing. There was a separate small unit for female prisoners. 
 
The prison had a capacity of 134 places: 120 for male and 14 for female prisoners. However, 
at the time of the visit, the establishment was in the process of undergoing extensive renovations 
which meant that the female section was closed and the eight spurs of the male accommodation 
block were being upgraded one at a time. As a consequence, the prison was holding 110 male 
prisoners. However, an additional 58 prisoners (including 11 women and three juveniles) were 
being held at Philipsburg Police Station and at Simpson Bay Remand Centre, both of which were 
staffed by prison officers and under the operational management of Point Blanche Prison. 
 
All categories of male and female prisoners were held in the prison: convicted prisoners 
serving long and short sentences, remand prisoners and young offenders. 
 
 
235. In the course of the visit, the delegation was appraised of plans to build two additional floors 
on top of the existing accommodation block. The first additional floor would contain 40 cells (i.e. 
an exact replica of the existing accommodation spurs) and the upper floor two wings with 20 cells 
for young people and two wings with rooms for activities. This would increase the capacity of the 
prison by a further 180 places, creating a prison with an overall capacity of 314 places. 
 
 The CPT acknowledges that the current capacity of the prison is already too small for the 
number of prisoners and that the small footprint of the establishment means that there are few 
options to increase the capacity other than through building additional floors. Nevertheless, the 
Committee wishes to highlight several concerns regarding the proposed expansion of the prison. 
 
 
236. The prison population in Sint Maarten has risen from 131 in 2002 to 168 in 2014 at the time 
of the visit, an increase of some 30%, which brings the rate of imprisonment for the territory to the 
118
equivalent of 420 per 100,000. Should the additional capacity at Pointe Blanche Prison be 
brought into service, experience shows that it is likely to be filled which means that the rate of 
imprisonment could reach levels of over 750 per 100,000, resulting in Sint Maarten having one of 
the highest rates of incarceration in the world. The Committee considers that it would be far 
preferable for a strategy for the sustainable reduction of the prison population to be put in place, 
which ensures that imprisonment is in practice the measure of last resort at all stages of the criminal 
justice system, from pre-trial to the execution of sentences. In the light of experience in certain 
other jurisdictions, consideration might also be given to avoiding sending persons to prison for short 
periods. Instead, such sentences could be served in the community. The report of the Council on 
Law Enforcement on “Detention capacity in St Maarten” submitted to the Minister of Justice on 26 
February 2014 would appear to advocate a similar approach. 
                                                 
117
  The Aruban Correctional Institution (KIA) has exactly the same design, with the staff control room situated 
between the ground and first floor. 
118
  In Aruba the rate is 210 per 100,000 and in Curaçao closer to 200 per 100,000.
