- 110 - 
The CPT recommends that the authorities of Sint Maarten adopt and implement a 
coherent strategy designed to combat prison overcrowding, taking due account of the relevant 
Council of Europe recommendations in this area, such as Recommendation R (99) 22 
concerning prison population inflation; Rec (2000) 22 of 29 November 2000 on improving the 
implementation of the European rules on community sanctions and measures; Rec (2003) 22 
on conditional release (parole); Rec (2006) 13 on the use of remand in custody; and 
Recommendation CM/Rec (2010)1 on the Council of Europe Probation Rules. 
 
 
237. As to the actual design of the expansion, it would appear that the 120 prisoners on the first 
additional floor and the 60 young people on the floor above would all use stairways which brought 
them down onto the existing central gallery, off which the current 120 places are located. At 
present, there are numerous instances of inter-prisoner violence around this gallery due to the gates 
to the four wings (eight spurs) not always being properly secured, thus enabling prisoners from 
different wings to come into contact with one another. If the pressures of an additional 180 
prisoners passing through this gallery were to be added, as they must to access the outdoor exercise 
yards, gym and other services in the prison, managing movements through this central gallery 
would become even more complex and promote the likelihood of even more violent incidents.  
 
 The CPT would like to receive the comments of the Sint Maarten authorities on this 
matter. 
 
 Of course, the concerns raised above would be somewhat alleviated if the authorities were to 
take into consideration the recommendation made by the CPT in paragraph 241 below concerning 
cell occupancy levels. Reducing the cell occupancy level to no more than two prisoners would 
reduce the capacity of the prison by 100 to 214. 
 
 
2. Ill-treatment 
 
 
238. The great majority of the prisoners met by the CPT’s delegation stated that they had no 
problems with the prison staff. However, a few allegations of deliberate ill-treatment of inmates by 
prison officers were received and quite a few accounts of abusive language by staff, notably by 
officers at Philipsburg Police Station. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the Sint Maarten authorities deliver the clear message to 
prison officers that all forms of ill-treatment, including verbal abuse, are not acceptable and 
will be the subject of sanctions.
