- 111 - 
239. Many prisoners told the CPT’s delegation that they did not feel safe in Point Blanche Prison 
and several allegations of inter-prisoner violence and intimidation were received. In particular, 
some inmates stated that prison officers were either not aware or insufficiently attentive to the 
possibility of prisoners from one wing being able to mix with other prisoners from another wing 
when the gates leading on to the central gallery were opened. Moreover, a few inmates alleged that 
119
staff were slow to intervene when a fight among inmates broke out. In addition, a few inmates 
stated that no action was taken by the prison authorities when they made complaints about prisoners 
threatening and intimidating them, and that in the past prisoners were not punished for assaulting 
another inmate. 
 
 In the period since the delegation’s visit, the CPT was informed about a serious violent 
incident in Point Blanche Prison on 11 September 2014, involving a firearm and machetes. In the 
subsequent search of the establishment another firearm and several stabbing weapons were found. 
The incident has apparently led to action being taken, including a plan to set up a task force to 
restructure the prison. Further, the delegation received information that on 1 October 2014 an 
inmate had been stabbed at Simpson Bay Remand Centre.  
 
 
240. Addressing the phenomenon of inter-prisoner violence and intimidation requires that prison 
staff be alert to signs of trouble and both resolved and properly trained to intervene when necessary. 
The existence of positive relations between staff and prisoners, based on the notions of dynamic 
security and care, is a decisive factor in this context; this will depend in large measure on staff 
being present and possessing appropriate interpersonal communication skills. It is also obvious that 
an effective strategy to tackle inter-prisoner intimidation/violence should seek to ensure that prison 
staff are placed in a position to exercise their authority in an appropriate manner. Consequently, the 
level of staffing must be sufficient (including at night-time) to enable prison officers to supervise 
adequately the activities of prisoners and support each other effectively in the exercise of their 
tasks. Both initial and ongoing training programmes for staff of all grades must address the issue of 
managing inter-prisoner violence. 
 
 In addition, a key component in the management of inter-prisoner relations is the careful 
assessment, classification and cell allocation of individual prisoners within the prison population.  
 
 The CPT reiterates its recommendation that the prison management of Point Blanche 
Prison develop a strategy to address the challenge of inter-prisoner violence, taking into 
account the above remarks. Further, it wishes to receive information on the investigations into 
the incidents mentioned in paragraph 239 and any subsequent action taken. 
 
  
                                                 
119
  However, the action of a prison officer who placed his body between two prisoners in November 2013, one of 
whom was slashing the other prisoner with a home-made machete, represents a singular act of self-sacrifice 
and professionalism.
