- 112 - 
3. Conditions of detention 
 
 
a. Point Blanche main Prison 
 
 
241. The material conditions were the same as those described in the report on the 2002 visit and 
could generally be described as satisfactory. However, the cells (10 m²) continued to accommodate 
up to three prisoners which made for cramped living conditions even taking into account that 
inmates could spend much of the day out of their cells in the corridor running the length of each 
spur (equivalent to 5 cells). Further, the delegation noted that several cells continued to have 
problems of leaking water, even after having been renovated. Prisoners also complained about a 
lack of cleaning products and the glare from the ubiquitous use of white paint in all outdoor areas; 
an issue that can be addressed locally.  
 
 All prisoners, section by section, were offered one hour of outdoor exercise every day. 
 
The CPT recommends that cells of 10 m² do not accommodate more than two 
prisoners, and ideally that they only hold one prisoner. Further, the Committee would like to 
be informed of the state of repair of the prison following the renovation work, including as 
regards the association and exercise rooms. 
 
 
242. The delegation received numerous complaints from prisoners in all sections of the prison as 
well as at Simpson Bay and Philipsburg Police Station about the monotonous nature of the food; 
notably, that the menu consisted of chicken every day. The chef was creative in finding different 
ways to cook chicken but the problem was, as he himself explained, that the budget was extremely 
limited ever since a strike by inmate kitchen workers had led the prison to employ mostly outside 
workers in their place on a permanent basis.  
 
While the Committee recognises the good intentions of the prison management to ensure a 
reliable kitchen service, the result could be viewed over the longer term as a group punishment of 
all prisoners. Moreover, in almost all prisons, the opportunity for inmates to work in the kitchen 
provides inmates with a meaningful activity by which they can earn a little money and learn some 
relevant skills; it is also perceived by inmates as a highly desirable job within a prison. Further, it 
permits more of the budget to be devoted to food rather than employment costs. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the current approach to employing outside workers in the 
kitchen be reviewed, with a view to replacing them with inmates, thus enabling more funding 
to be spent on food stuffs and as a result providing a more varied diet to prisoners.
