- 113 - 
243. At the time of the visit, there was little in the way of purposeful activities for prisoners, with 
only some 20 prisoners having work while the vast majority of prisoners idled away their days. 
 
The CPT recalls that the aim should be to ensure that all prisoners, including those on 
remand, spend a reasonable part of the day (i.e. eight hours or more) outside their cells, engaged in 
purposeful activities of a varied nature: work, preferably with vocational value; education; sport; 
recreation/association. A regime which provides for varied activities, as part of an individualised 
sentence plan, is essential for the welfare of prisoners during their incarceration as well as being a 
vital component in the preparation for release. 
 
The CPT reiterates its recommendation that activities for prisoners be further 
developed, with a view to ensuring that all prisoners (including those on remand) can spend a 
reasonable part of the day (i.e. 8 hours or more) outside their cells engaged in purposeful 
activities of a varied nature: work, preferably with vocational value; education; sport; 
recreation/association. 
 
 
b. Simpson Bay Remand Centre 
 
 
244. Simpson Bay was built as an immigration detention centre and a Judicial Permission of 25 
November 2011 and signed by the Minister of Justice was granted to allow the premises to be used 
as a prison for 18 months.  
 
At the time of the visit, all 11 female remand and sentenced prisoners were being held in a 
large dormitory on the first floor. The room was in a decent state of repair and had reasonable 
access to natural light and adequate artificial lighting. However, there was little ventilation and the 
toilets, lined up in a row, provided no privacy as there was no door enclosing each cubicle. 
 
As for the regime, the women had access to an association room from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., 
where they could watch television, and an effort had been made to initiate a series of activities such 
as anger management, Bible and English language classes for two and a half hours twice a week. 
Moreover, the women were not offered any outdoor exercise. Taken together this does not 
constitute a sufficient programme of purpose activities. 
 
The conditions of detention in the two dormitories on the second floor, which were 
accommodating male prisoners, were of a similar standard. Although they were offered access to an 
outdoor exercise yard every day, they were not provided with any activities. 
 
While bearing in mind that holding prisoners at Simpson Bay is supposed to be a temporary 
measure (up to some four months at the time of the visit), it is nevertheless important that prisoners 
are provided with decent material conditions and that they are offered some purposeful activities. 
Further, they should all be offered at least one hour of outdoor exercise every day. 
 
The CPT recommends that the necessary steps be taken to remedy the deficiencies 
outlined above, for as long as Simpson Bay continues to be used for holding prisoners.
