- 114 - 
4. Prison staff 
 
 
245. At the time of the visit, Point Blanche Prison had 104 staff of whom 85 were prison officers 
which in theory should be sufficient. However, sick-leave levels were extremely high averaging 
about 30% and a number of officers were suspended pending dismissal. Further, both Simpson’s 
Bay Remand Centre and Philipsburg Police Station were staffed by prison officers on a rotation 
basis. As a result, the number of officers on each shift in the main prison area was extremely 
limited; for example, only two officers were on duty in the central gallery of the accommodation 
block in the afternoons. The low staffing levels meant that it was not unusual for officers to work 
long hours of overtime and, not surprisingly, the delegation observed that little was done to promote 
positive relations between staff and prisoners. 
 
 It is essential that the excessive amounts of overtime worked by some staff is reduced and 
that the rates of absenteeism among staff are tackled. This will require inter alia recruiting more 
staff and addressing staff management issues such as ensuring that the promotion system is more 
meritocratic. Several staff members expressed their desire to see the prison better equipped to 
address the needs of prisoners, and putting in place a staff development programme would 
contribute to the professionalisation of staff and assist towards creating the possibility of a 
rehabilitative regime in all constituent parts of the prison.  
 
Professionalisation of staff should see the role of a prison officer evolving from that of 
essentially a “turn-key” with no responsibility other than that of static security. Instead, prison 
officers should be encouraged to extend their role into interacting positively with inmates, taking 
part in rehabilitation programmes and being an integral element in a multi-disciplinary approach 
towards prisoners’ welfare. This would not only provide a far more challenging and interesting job 
for the prison officers but it would also address the rehabilitation aspect of prison which has to date 
been moribund. Of course, this would necessitate introducing far more training for those prison 
officers capable and willing to take up this additional role. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the Sint Maarten authorities take the necessary measures 
to increase the number of prison officers employed as well as to develop the capacity and role 
of prison officers, in the light of the above remarks. In parallel, the amounts of overtime 
should be reduced and the levels of, and reasons for, absenteeism tackled. 
 
 
246. More generally, it is important that prison officers be provided with regular in-service 
training courses to improve their skills and knowledge, and  also receive refresher courses.  
 
The CPT recommends that all prison officers be offered regular in-service training.
