- 115 - 
5. Health-care services 
 
 
247. At the time of the visit, a general practitioner visited the prison once a week for four hours 
and there were three full-time nurses, all of whom were present in the establishment from 7.30 a.m. 
to 5 p.m. five days a week. Outside of these hours and at weekends, a nurse was on call. In addition, 
a psychiatrist visited every fortnight. Specialist consultations were arranged with the hospital in 
Philipsburg and posed no specific difficulties. However, there was no visiting dentist and the 
waiting list for an outside consultation was many months. 
For a prison with an actual population of over 160 inmates, in three locations, the number of 
visiting hours of the doctor was too low.  
 
The CPT recommends that the presence of the doctor at the prison be increased to the 
equivalent of a half-time position. Further, provision should be made for a dentist to visit the 
prison once a week and for the dentist’s surgery to be properly equipped. 
 
 
248. The CPT’s delegation noted favourably that every newly admitted prisoner to Point Blanche 
was seen by a nurse within 24 hours of arrival. The medical assessment included screening for 
infectious diseases (including HIV and hepatitis C), mental health problems and addictions; blood 
samples were sent to an outside laboratory. The written consent of the prisoners was obligatory 
before any blood samples were taken. 
 
 
249. The CPT has consistently pointed out that prison health-care services can make a significant 
contribution to the prevention of ill-treatment of detained persons through, inter alia, the systematic 
recording of injuries, whether vis-à-vis new arrivals or following a violent episode in prison. In this 
respect, the health-care services at Point Blanche Prison generally recorded injuries observed in 
sufficient detail. However, in addition to a description of any injuries, the doctor should note down 
a full account of the statements made by the person concerned which are relevant to the medical 
examination. Further, a doctor should indicate as far as possible the consistency between any 
allegations made and the objective medical findings; this will enable the relevant authorities to 
properly assess the information set out in the record. Such an approach was not being followed at 
Pointe Blanche. In addition, it is essential that all such reports are transmitted to the relevant 
authorities. 
 
The CPT recommends that measures be taken to ensure that the record drawn up 
after the medical examination of a prisoner – whether newly arrived or following a violent 
incident in prison – contains:  
 
(i) an account of statements made by the person which are relevant to the medical 
examination (including his/her description of his/her state of health and any allegations 
of ill-treatment);  
(ii) a full account of objective medical findings based on a thorough examination;  
(iii) the doctor’s observations in the light of i) and ii) indicating the consistency 
between any allegations made and the objective medical findings.
