- 116 - 
 
Recording of the medical examination in cases of traumatic injuries should be made on 
a special form provided for this purpose, with "body charts" for marking traumatic injuries 
that will be kept in the medical file of the prisoner. If any photographs are made, they should 
be filed in the medical record of the inmate concerned. In addition, documents should be 
compiled systematically in a special trauma register where all types of injuries should be 
recorded. 
 
The results of every examination, including the above-mentioned statements and the 
doctor’s opinions/observations, should be made available to the prisoner and, with the consent 
of the prisoner, to his or her lawyer. Further, the existing procedures be reviewed in order to 
ensure that whenever injuries are recorded which are consistent with allegations of ill-
treatment made by a prisoner (or which, even in the absence of allegations, are indicative of 
ill-treatment), the report is immediately brought to the attention of the relevant prosecutor 
regardless of the wishes of the person concerned. 
 
 
250. As regards medical confidentiality, the CPT’s delegation found that it was generally 
respected. Medical examinations took place out of the hearing and sight of custodial staff. Further, 
medical documentation was only accessible to health-care staff; it should also be mentioned that the 
medical files were very well ordered and meticulously kept.  
 
 The delegation also observed that nursing staff prepared medication in dosage boxes which 
were subsequently distributed by prison officers after 5 p.m. and at weekends. Consequently, 
medication and its dosage are clearly visible to the custodial staff. Such a practice could 
compromise medical confidentiality requirements and does not contribute to the proper 
establishment of a doctor-patient relationship. In the CPT’s view, medication should be distributed 
by health-care staff.  
 
 The CPT recommends that the authorities draw up a list of medication that should in 
every case be distributed by health-care staff (such as anti-psychotics, methadone and 
antiretroviral drugs) and to put in place procedures for the distribution of other medication 
that guarantees confidentiality. Further, the health-care service should ensure that the drugs 
chart, showing which prisoner was provided with which medication and when, is properly 
maintained, and that all missed medication dosages are recorded.  
 
 
251. The delegation was informed that prisoners with mental health problems were no longer 
transferred to Curaçao for treatment. Instead, the prisoners would be treated at Pointe Blanche 
Prison. At the time of the visit, there was one prisoner who had been diagnosed with a psychiatric 
disorder. He had been transferred from an ordinary accommodation wing to a single-occupancy cell 
in the small four-cell protection unit a month prior to the visit as his behaviour was judged to be 
“strange”. In early May 2014, he had refused to be medicated after the psychiatrist recommended 
that he continue to receive his moditen depot prescription every three weeks. As a result, medical 
staff from the Mental Health Foundation, which provides psychiatric services to the prison and in 
the community, were called to the prison and forcibly injected him. 
 
 The CPT considers that prisoners suffering from a serious mental disorder should be kept 
and cared for in a hospital facility which is adequately equipped and possesses appropriately trained 
staff. Pointe Blanche Prison possessed neither the staff nor the facilities to hold prisoners suffering 
from a serious mental health disorder.
