- 117 - 
The CPT acknowledges the challenge facing the authorities of having to establish an 
institution which would be capable of providing the different types of specialist care required based 
on treatment and rehabilitation, for the rather small numbers of patients involved. 
 
The CPT recommends that the Sint Maarten authorities take the necessary steps to 
ensure that prisoners suffering from a serious mental disorder are cared for in an adequately 
equipped hospital environment. Further, it would like to receive details of the treatment 
afforded to the above-mentioned prisoner since the time of the visit. 
 
 
6. Other issues  
 
 
252. As regards discipline, the CPT’s delegation noted that there had been 55 cases in the 13 
months prior to the visit. Due to the lack of space, recourse to solitary confinement was rare and 
most punishments consisted of a denial of visits or of bringing in food from outside.  
 
 It was, however, difficult to obtain a clear overall picture in relation to discipline and the use 
of force due to the way in which the records were kept. It is envisaged that the new computer 
system will enable better record keeping and the possibility to extract the information in a way that 
is useful for management and oversight purposes. The CPT would like to receive confirmation 
that a new record keeping procedure for disciplinary offences and use of force is now in place. 
 
 
253. A number of prisoners complained about the manner in which cell searches were carried out 
by a special unit of officers wearing balaclavas and accompanied by dogs. They stated that during 
the last search in December 2013, the officers had thrown all the belongings in the cell onto the 
floor and trampled over them, breaking several personal possessions and dirtying clothes and 
bedding.  
 
 The CPT wishes to emphasise that it is opposed to the wearing of balaclavas by special-
purpose units carrying out operations within penitentiary establishments. The Committee recognises 
that, for operational and/or security reasons, the wearing of protective helmets may be necessary. 
However, it should be ensured that subsequent identification of the officers concerned is always 
possible by the relevant authorities and by prisoners, through not only a clearly distinctive badge 
but also a prominent identification number on each uniform/helmet. In addition, interventions of 
this type should be video recorded (e.g. with tactical cameras as part of the equipment of the 
penitentiary officers concerned). A prisoner from the cell being searched or an independent 
observer should be present to ensure the search is carried out correctly. 
 
 The CPT recommends that a clear protocol for cell searches be drawn up, taking into 
account the above remarks.
