- 118 - 
 
254. The CPT welcomes the general rule to permit “open” visits at Point Blanche Prison. The 
restrictions on visitors bringing in cakes and drinks were legitimate in order to cut back on 
contraband entering the establishment.  
 
However, the delegation received a number of complaints from foreign national prisoners 
about the limited possibilities of contact with their families. The CPT wishes to re-emphasise the 
need for some flexibility as regards the application of rules on visits vis-à-vis prisoners whose 
families live far away.  
 
The CPT recommends that the relevant rules be amended so as to make it possible in 
appropriate cases to accumulate individual visit entitlements. 
 
 
255. As regards the use of the telephone, a card system was in operation and prisoners could 
access the phones when they wanted. However, many of the card telephones at Point Blanche were 
not functioning, which for those prisoners, particularly foreign nationals, who did not have access to 
a mobile phone caused considerable frustration. At Simpson Bay, there was also a problem with 
access to a telephone for female prisoners. They could only access an official mobile telephone 
every morning for about one hour, which was not only expensive but this access was also at a time 
when neither their children nor other family members were available. 
 
 The CPT recommends that the card phones at Point Blanche be repaired. Further, 
access to a telephone should be improved at Simpson’s Bay. 
 
 
256. There was no record of any complaints made by inmates, and prisoners stated that there was 
no point in filing a complaint as no response would be received and no action taken. Instead, the 
delegation was told that complaints would be made through a prisoner’s lawyer.  
 
Further, inmates appeared to have no confidence in the Supervisory Committee taking up 
their complaints.  
 
The CPT considers that it is essential for Point Blanche Prison to put in place a properly 
functioning internal complaints system; for example, prisoners ought to be able to make written 
complaints at any moment and place them in a locked complaints box on a prison landing (forms 
should be freely available); all written complaints should be registered centrally within the prison 
before being allocated to a particular service for investigation or follow up. In all cases, the 
investigation should be carried out expeditiously (with any delays justified) and prisoners should be 
informed within clearly defined time periods of the action taken to address their concern or of the 
reasons for considering the complaint not justified. In addition, statistics on the types of complaints 
made should be kept as an indicator to management of areas of discontent within the prison. Of 
course, prison officers should be encouraged and empowered as far as possible to resolve 
complaints themselves and if this is not possible recourse to a written procedure should be 
promoted.  
 
The CPT recommends that the Sint Maarten authorities review the current system of 
complaints, taking into account the above remarks.
