their institutional stakeholders. Who is accountable to whom varies depending on whether 
decisions or actions taken are internal or external to an organization or institution. In general an 
organization or an institution is accountable to those who will be affected by its decisions or 
actions. Accountability cannot be enforced without transparency and the rule of law. 
 Effectiveness and efficiency. Good governance means that processes and institutions produce 
results that meet the needs of society while making the best use of resources at their disposal. 
The concept of efficiency in the context of good governance also covers the sustainable use of 
natural resources and the protection of the environment. 
 Participation by both men and women is a key cornerstone of good governance. Participation 
could be either direct or through legitimate intermediate institutions or representatives. It is 
important to point out that representative democracy does not necessarily mean that the 
concerns of the most vulnerable in society would be taken into consideration in decision 
making. Participation needs to be informed and organized. This means freedom of association 
and expression on the one hand and an organized civil society on the other hand. 
 Consensus oriented. There are several actors and as many view points in a given society. 
Good governance requires mediation of the different interests in society to reach a broad 
consensus in society on what is in the best interest of the whole community and how this can 
be achieved. It also requires a broad and long-term perspective on what is needed for 
sustainable human development and how to achieve the goals of such development. This can 
only result from an understanding of the historical, cultural and social contexts of a given 
society or community. 
 Responsiveness. Good governance requires that institutions and processes try to serve all 
stakeholders within a reasonable timeframe. 
 Equity and inclusiveness. A society’s well being depends on ensuring that all its members feel 
that they have a stake in it and do not feel excluded from the mainstream of society. This 
requires all groups, but particularly the most vulnerable, have opportunities to improve or 
maintain their well being. 
 
Binnen het onderzoek worden bovenstaande beginselen gebruikt als toetsingskader voor de 
uitvoeringspraktijk (zie hoofdstuk 8). De enige uitzondering hierop vormt Effectiveness and 
efficiency. In afwijking op de interpretatie van de VN wordt door de onderzoekers aangesloten bij 
wat in Nederland onder effectiviteit en doelmatigheid wordt verstaan. Met effectiviteit wordt binnen 
het onderzoek bedoeld 'de mate waarin de voorgenomen doelen gerealiseerd zijn'. Onder 
doelmatigheid wordt hier verstaan 'de mate waarin de middelen waarmee de doelrealisatie wordt 
nagestreefd in verhouding staan tot de opbrengst'.  
Bestuurskracht  
‘Bestuurskracht’ is een relatief nieuw theoretisch concept dat als eerste in een onderzoek naar de 
7
effecten van herindeling door Van Toonen e.a. in 1998 werd gebruikt. De genuanceerde en meer 
dimensionele benadering in dit onderzoek van het concept leek op voorhand niet eenvoudig toe te 
 
 
 
Noot 7 Toonen, T., Dam, M. van, Glim, M &. Wallagh, G (1998). Gemeenten in ontwikkeling. Herindeling en kwaliteit. 
Assen: Van Gorcum 
 13 RAPPORT | Werking nieuwe bestuurlijke structuur Caribisch Nederland | DSP-groep
