MIT advies 2023-2 
Achtergrond 
Datum 
22-02-2023 
 
 
 
1. Studies 
Liu, J., Shahab, Y., & Hoque, H. (2022). Government response measures and 
public trust during the COVID‐ 19 pandemic: Evidence from around the 
world. British Journal of Management, 33(2), 571-602. 
Survey 
• This international study (178 countries) examines public trust in government 
and public belief in its truthfulness in respect of the measures it is taking to 
combat COVID-19. 
• Our study provides the first evidence that integrated government 
response policies, underpinned by economic subsidies and containment 
health measures, are vital for winning public trust.  
• Our further analysis of systems of national governance demonstrates that 
the accountability and transparency of government institutions, and 
their ability to meet public expectations, are fundamental to 
engendering trust in government.  
• Most significantly, the strength of our results emphasizes the 
overwhelming importance of transparency and truthfulness in official 
communications with citizens. Public information and campaigns are 
decisive in allaying people’s fears and enlisting public support in the fight 
against COVID, which is crucial to the management of the crisis and the 
economic aftermath.  
• To overcome the global nature of the crisis and stimulate economic 
recovery, nations must work together openly and honestly, with politicians 
evincing unprecedented levels of fiduciary and mutual trust. The often 
repeated mantra ‘We are all in this together’ must never be forgotten, and 
the spirit of communitarianism this invokes must become the foundation 
for coordinated international responses to pandemics. 
 
Suleimany, M., Mokhtarzadeh, S., & Sharifi, A. (2022). Community resilience to 
pandemics: An assessment framework developed based on the review of COVID-
19 literature. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 103248. 
Literature review & inductive content analysis 
• This study aims to propose an integrated framework for assessing the 
pandemic resilience of communities. 
• Based on the related literature, we developed an assessment framework for 
community resilience to pandemics. Table 3, as the output of this study, is 
an integrated checklist that includes criteria and factors of a resilient 
Pagina 25 van 43
