MIT advies 2023-2 
community to pandemics in five dimensions institutional (among which 
Datum 
trust), social, economic, infrastructural, and demographic. 
22-02-2023 
 
 
• Community resilience to the pandemics is a multidimensional approach 
with multiple criteria and factors. This suggests that government 
institutions must carefully plan for possible conditions and manage the 
community by monitoring the situation and potential risks to build a more 
resilient community to pandemics. Governments must take these steps in 
partnership with citizens to increase the pace and efficiency of their 
programs. 
 
Schmidthuber, L., Ingrams, A., & Hilgers, D. (2021). Government openness and 
public trust: The mediating role of democratic capacity. Public Administration 
Review, 81(1), 91-109. 
Findings indicate that structural openness is, in general, positively associated with 
higher trust. Further, the effect of openness on public trust is partially mediated by 
an individual's perception that they have meaningful opportunities for political 
participation. 
• Cross-national evidence shows that, in general, European countries 
investing in government openness benefit from a higher level of citizen 
trust in the public system. 
• If governments focus on satisfying citizens’ expectations regarding 
democratic decision-making possibilities, they are likely to reap more 
rewards in terms of greater citizen trust. 
• Improving citizens' sense of empowerment to influence governmental 
systems helps translate openness reforms into greater levels of citizen trust. 
 
Lazarus, J. V., Romero, D., Kopka, C. J., Karim, S. A., Abu-Raddad, L. J., Almeida, 
G., ... & El-Mohandes, A. (2022). A multinational Delphi consensus to end the 
COVID-19 public health threat. Nature, 1-14. 
• In this Delphi study, a diverse, multidisciplinary panel of 386 academic, 
health, non-governmental organization, government and other experts in 
COVID-19 response from 112 countries and territories to recommend 
specific actions to end this persistent global threat to public health. The 
panel developed a set of 41 consensus statements and 57 recommendations 
to governments. 
• Recommendations with at least 99% combined agreement advise 
governments and other stakeholders to improve communication, rebuild 
public trust and engage communities in the management of pandemic 
responses.  
• Institutions and individuals should advance public trust by seeking training 
on building trust and developing trust-oriented communication strategies, 
expanding collaboration with community leaders and the scientific 
community, and working with individuals and organizations that have 
Pagina 26 van 43
