MIT advies 2023-2 
established trust in communities. Using the preferred means of 
Datum 
communication for different populations was unanimously recommended 
22-02-2023 
 
to further earn trust.  
Communicatie (Tabel 4 artikel) 
• Community leaders, scientific experts and public health authorities should 
collaborate to develop public health messages that build and enhance 
individual and community trust and use the preferred means of access and 
communication for different populations.  
• Public health authorities should partner with individuals and organizations 
that are trusted within their communities to provide accurate, accessible 
information about the pandemic and inform behaviour change.  
• Public health professionals and authorities should combat false information 
proactively based on clear, direct, culturally responsive messaging that is 
free of unnecessary scientific jargon.  
• Institutions and individuals that wish to advance public trust should: (1) 
draw on evidence about how trust is created and restored; (2) provide 
training and professional development emphasizing skills and 
competencies that convey trustworthiness; and (3) develop, implement and 
assess communication strategies that are highly likely to create or restore 
trust. 
• Multidisciplinary researchers should assess the impact of the ‘infodemic’ on 
health behaviours and outcomes in specific populations of all countries. 
• Research funders should commission more scoping, narrative and 
systematic reviews to synthesize, evaluate and disseminate COVID-19-
related evidence. 
• Governments should determine which agencies are or should be 
accountable for monitoring health information and develop monitoring 
tools to identify false information.  
• Social media companies should engage transparently with researchers and 
developers, who are free of a direct conflict of interest, to implement 
controls for their platforms that reduce publication and dissemination of 
false health information.  
• Governments, industry and non-governmental organizations should 
actively identify and expose individuals and networks that promote false 
health information about the COVID-19 pandemic.  
• Governments should consider holding publishers of false health 
information liable, while balancing civil liberties. 
Health system (Tabel 4 artikel) 
• The volume and velocity of information during the COVID-19 pandemic 
have made it difficult for people to assess the accuracy of information.  
• Public health authorities contribute to the dissemination of false 
information when their communications do not reflect current scientific 
understanding that transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is primarily airborne.  
Pagina 27 van 43
