MIT advies 2023-2 
• Governments have inconsistently counteracted false information in the 
Datum 
context of the COVID-19 pandemic.  22-02-2023 
 
 
• Sources of false information undermine the social cohesion needed for an 
effective public health response.  
• During the pandemic, public health officials have ineffectively engaged 
populations that have low levels of trust in government. 
• Blaming unvaccinated individuals for continuation of the pandemic shifts 
attention away from government accountability.  
• A government’s decision to reduce COVID-19 pandemic control measures 
does not mean that the threat to public health has ended. 
 
2. Rapporten  
Building Trust to Reinforce Democracy - Main Findings from the 2021 OECD Survey 
on Drivers of Trust in Public Institutions Rapportenreeks: Building Trust to Reinforce 
Democracy 
Main Findings from the 2021 OECD Survey on Drivers of Trust in Public Institutions 
What drives trust in government? This report presents the main findings of the first 
OECD cross-national survey on trust in government and public institutions, 
representing over 50 000 responses across 22 OECD countries (Australia, Austria, 
Belgium, Canada, Colombia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Iceland, Ireland, 
Japan, Korea, Latvia, Luxembourg, Mexico, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, 
Portugal, Sweden and the United Kingdom). The survey measures government 
performance across five drivers of trust – reliability, responsiveness, integrity, 
openness, and fairness – and provides insights for future policy reforms. This 
investigation marks an important initiative by OECD countries to measure and 
better understand what drives people’s trust in public institutions – a crucial part of 
reinforcing democracy. 
 
‒ Governments could do better in responding to citizens’ concerns and tackling 
issues that are important to them, like climate change:  While 50.4% think 
governments should be doing more to reduce climate change, only 35.5% are 
confident that countries will actually succeed in reducing their country’s 
contribution to climate change. Less than a third of citizens feel they have a say in 
what government does (30.2%). 
Strengthening confidence in government’s ability to address global challenges is a 
priority. Governments face new threats in the form of 
disinformation/misinformation, unequal opportunities for representation and 
participation, and intergenerational, global, and existential crises like climate 
change.  
 
‒  Generational, educational, income, gender and regional gaps in trust indicate 
that progress can be made in enhancing participation and representation for 
Pagina 28 van 43
