MIT advies 2023-2 
all: Disadvantaged groups with less real or perceived access to opportunity and 
Datum 
voice have lower levels of trust in government. Women and people with less 
22-02-2023 
 
education and lower incomes tend to trust the government less. Younger people 
 
also have lower trust in government than older ones, with an almost ten percentage 
point trust gap in surveyed OECD countries. These gaps may reflect the negative 
impact that wider societal inequalities are having on public trust and their role in 
fuelling partisanship and polarisation. The report shows, for example, that people 
who did not vote for their country’s incumbent government are far less likely to 
trust it. 
 
‒  Public perception of government integrity is an issue: Slightly less than half of 
citizens(47.8%), on average across countries, think a high-level political official 
would grant a political favour in exchange for the offer of a well-paid private sector 
job. Around a third (35.7%) think that a public employee would accept money in 
exchange for speeding up access to a public service. 
 
These results serve as a call to action for OECD governments. Governments must 
continue improving their reliability and preparedness for future crises, designing 
policies and public services with and for people, enhancing transparency and 
communications to citizens around promises and results. To meet their citizens’ 
evolving expectations, OECD governments will need to  
• connect and engage better with citizens in policy design, delivery and 
reform;  
• safeguard and enhance people’s ability to exercise effective political voice; 
• invest in public integrity/ensure the integrity of elected and high level 
officials;  
• continuously measure and improve public service delivery;  
• and ensure the inclusion of vulnerable and marginalised groups 
 
 
OECD - Government at a glance (2021) 
Fine-tuning consultation and engagement practices could improve transparency 
and trust in public institutions 
• In 2020, 27 of 32 (85%) of OECD countries had government-wide participation 
portals, where all central/federal ministries publish consultation and 
engagement opportunities. 38% of OECD countries had several portals, and 
47% had a single portal. 
• The use of virtual consultations in regulatory policy-making has increased since 
2017; from 35% to 62% of OECD countries for early-stage consultations, and 
from 41% to 57% of countries for late-stage consultations. 
• In 92% of OECD countries, policy makers consult early on draft regulations with 
selected groups; open consultations are more common only at a late stage. 
• In 2020, 20 of 24 (87%) of OECD countries had a strategy to mitigate public 
integrity risks, particularly corruption. However, only 8 of 20 (40%) of integrity 
Pagina 29 van 43
