MIT advies 2023-2 
strategies underwent inter-governmental and public consultation. Less than 
Datum 
half of countries have transparency requirements covering most of the actors 
22-02-2023 
 
that regularly engage in lobbying. 
 
 
Een samenvatting die hierbij verscheen: 
Government at a Glance 2021 says that one of the biggest lessons of the pandemic is 
that governments will need to respond to future crises at speed and scale while 
safeguarding trust and transparency. 
Countries have introduced thousands of emergency regulations, often on a fast 
track. Some alleviation of standards is inevitable in an emergency, but must be 
limited in scope and time to avoid damaging citizen perceptions of the competence, 
openness, transparency, and fairness of government. 
Governments should step up their efforts in three areas to boost trust and 
transparency and reinforce democracy: 
• Tackling misinformation is key. Even with a boost in trust in government 
sparked by the pandemic in 2020, on average only 51% of people in OECD 
countries for which data is available trusted their government. There is a 
risk that some people and groups may be dissociating themselves from 
traditional democratic processes. 
• It is crucial to enhance representation and participation in a fair and 
transparent manner. Governments must seek to promote inclusion and 
diversity, support the representation of young people, women and other 
under-represented groups in public life and policy consultation. Fine-tuning 
consultation and engagement practices could improve transparency and 
trust in public institutions, says the report. Governments must also level the 
playing field in lobbying. Less than half of countries have transparency 
requirements covering most of the actors that regularly engage in lobbying. 
• Strengthening governance must be prioritised to tackle global challenges 
while harnessing the potential of new technologies. In 2018, only half of 
OECD countries had a specific government institution tasked with 
identifying novel, unforeseen or complex crises. To be fit for the future, and 
secure the foundations of democracy, governments must be ready to act at 
speed and scale while safeguarding trust and transparency.  
 
An updated OECD framework on drivers of trust in public institutions to meet 
current and future challenges | OECD Working Papers on Public Governance | OECD 
iLibrary (oecd-ilibrary.org) (Rapport, 2021) 
• This paper discusses the main determinants of people’s trust in public 
institutions and their measurement, in times of crisis as well as for a long-
term, strong, inclusive and green recovery. 
Pagina 30 van 43
