MIT advies 2023-2 
• The spread of on- and off-line misinformation, disinformation can reduce 
Datum 
compliance with the emergency measures being enacted, thereby 
22-02-2023 
 
threatening their efficacy and public trust in the response. The OECD has  
proposed key actions to counter this issue, such as supporting a 
multiplicity of independent fact-checking organisations, ensuring experts 
are in place to follow-up technological solutions, and improving users’ 
media, digital and health literacy skills (OECD, 2020[61]). (p15) 
o When feasible, governments are similarly undertaking efforts to 
“pre-bunk”, rebut and correct disinformation that could undermine 
trust and induce the public to harmful or counterproductive actions 
o Educating citizens about consuming and sharing content 
responsibly has also been an example of CoG use of public 
communication to counteract disinformation. In the UK, a “don’t 
feed the beast” campaign promotes the use of a checklist before 
sharing information that can be misleading (Government of United 
Kingdom, 2020[67]). 
• Beyond communications, the level of health literacy of populations is a key 
issue to keep in mind with regard to tackling disinformation and an 
important element to consider for building trust. Given gaps in the public’s 
health knowledge, investing in health literacy is paramount to consider even 
before a crisis emerges. (p15) 
• social media has emerged as a useful tool for crisis communication, with 
the potential to support two-way crisis communication at a low cost, and 
maintain trust in government by developing a more direct relationship with 
citizens (OECD, 2015[68]). (p15) (zie tekst voor voorbeelden uit landen) 
• A fourth takeaway is that evidence matters; The governance of evidence 
and the way in which information is processed, in terms of transparency and 
accessibility to citizens, is now part of the public debate. It requires serious 
questions, if governments want to be able to reap the trust dividends that 
will be critical for shaping successful policy outcomes and for organising a 
timely and effective economic recovery (p18) 
• A fifth takeaway is that guaranteeing openness in decision-making by 
ensuring that public communication is regular, transparent, compelling and 
based on audience insights is fundamental as governments work on 
catching citizens’ attention in a crowded media ecosystem (p18) 
o Providing clearer and information based on evidence is also crucial 
in the fight against disinformation, in addition to educating citizens 
about consuming and sharing content responsibly. 
 
OECD How better governance can help rebuild public trust (2017) 
Het rapport stelt dat vertrouwen in de eerste plaats wordt gedreven door 
competenties (d.w.z. responsiviteit, betrouwbaarheid) en waarden (d.w.z. openheid, 
integriteit, eerlijkheid) van openbare instellingen (OECD, 2017).  
Pagina 33 van 43
