MIT advies 2023-2 
In proposing a framework for understanding trust in public institutions, the report 
Datum 
places the emphasis on two principal drivers of trust: competence and values. These 
22-02-2023 
 
drivers encompass a range of qualities and attributes that have been shown to  
inspire trust – in particular reliability, integrity, responsiveness, fairness and 
openness. The report explores how these attributes can be better integrated into 
how governments make and implement public policies. 
Key findings 
• Two different but complementary components matter in understanding 
and analysing trust: i) competence or operational efficiency, capacity 
and good judgement to actually deliver on a given mandate; and ii) 
values or the underlying intentions and principles that guide actions and 
behaviours. Responsiveness and reliability are critical dimensions of 
competence; with regard to values, citizens expect integrity, openness 
and fairness.  
• With regard to values, four policy levers are particularly powerful in 
influencing trust:  
• governments defining and adhering to integrity 
principles;  
• seizing critical opportunities to demonstrate 
integrity in practice, such as large public 
infrastructure projects and major events;  
• political leaders leading by example (with regard to 
asset disclosure, transparency, etc.);  
• ensuring common standards and behaviours at all 
levels, since state and local authorities often 
interact more closely with citizens than do central 
government civil servants.  
• Improving public services, in terms of access, quality and 
responsiveness, plays an important role in strengthening trust in 
government: service performance, citizen satisfaction and public trust 
are closely connected. Better understanding citizens’ needs, experiences 
and preferences can result in better targeted services, including for 
underserved populations, often at little extra cost.  
• Citizens’ perception of fairness, in process as much as in outcome, is a 
critical dimension of trust. People must feel they have a real voice; are 
treated with respect; and receive necessary explanations. Positive 
perceptions of fairness lead to greater acceptance of decisions, better 
compliance with regulations, and more co operative behaviour in 
dealing with agents of the government. The reverse also holds: some 
citizens will even prefer negative consequences for themselves, such as 
financial penalties over compliance, if they perceive that they have been 
treated unfairly. In general, low trust generates extra transaction costs 
for citizens, businesses and government.  
Pagina 34 van 43
