MIT advies 2023-2 
• Sound use of public money is another important domain in which trust 
Datum 
can be easily lost. Governments need to ensure that the budget 
22-02-2023 
 
decision-making process itself is open and provides for an inclusive,  
participative and realistic debate on budgetary choices, and not simply 
provide access to information once spending decisions have been 
made. Tools to promote fiscal transparency include the Citizen’s 
Budget, which presents key public finance information for a general 
audience, and independent bodies responsible for oversight of fiscal 
policy (independent fiscal institutions or IFIs).  
• From law-making to budgeting and service delivery, efforts towards 
greater openness send a clear signal of a government’s commitment to 
invest in trust while improving the quality of the decisions made. The 
current move towards concepts of ‘open government’ and the even 
more ambitious ‘open state’ are positive signs that governments are 
trying to strengthen dialogue with citizens, even if in some cases this 
openness illuminates facts that generate distrust.  
• According to the Edelman Barometer 2016, which looked at customer 
behaviour, almost 70% of respondents chose to buy a product because 
they trusted the company. The private sector has shown that, with the 
right groundwork and preparation, the behaviour of individuals can be 
strongly influenced by perceived trustworthiness. Companies 
understand that there are two separate dimensions at play: cognitive 
(rational or experience-based) trust and affective (emotional) trust. 
They therefore tend to use an integrated approach in establishing trust 
with their different stakeholders. While the emotional dimension can be 
linked to, for example, brand loyalty, the rational will value such 
attributes as reliability and quality. For a public institution, developing a 
reputation for reliability and quality will bring tangible benefits, such as 
easier acceptance of new services, procedures or regulations.  
• Justice is perhaps the public service that most directly depends on a 
strong trust relationship between public institutions and citizens. There 
are various empirical, conceptual and institutional challenges in 
understanding the links between trust and justice; large gaps remain in 
the literature and in empirical research on trust in civil (as opposed to 
criminal) justice. Clearly however, the tools that matter most with 
regard to legal and justice services are similar to those discussed above 
with respect to other public services, such as reliability, responsiveness 
and fairness. Trustworthiness derives from understanding users’ needs 
and the pathways people in different situations use to access services, 
as well as integrating these services with other social services (e.g. 
health, employment). 
 
 
 
Pagina 35 van 43
