MIT advies 2023-2 
3. Mogelijk nog interessant 
Datum 
22-02-2023 
 
 
 
Mercuri, M., & Baigrie, B. (2022). The brave new world of pandemic 
resilience. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 28(3), 347. 
Editorial 
• In this editorial, we highlight some issues that will need to be addressed if 
we are to learn from our experience and build a society that is resilient to 
future threats from infectious disease. 
• There is the question of who participates in how we determine or define 
resilience. Involving nongovernmental stakeholders, not only the healthcare 
workforce, but also civil society and local communities would strengthen 
the response to an emergency through the formulation of acceptable 
policies and interventions. In turn, that would help build public trust in 
recommended emergency measures and reach marginalized communities. 
It is difficult to see how resilience can be achieved without buy‐ in for 
policies by a wide section of community stakeholders.  
• If we are to achieve resiliency, we need both to have ways to assess and 
reflect on what is being communicated and its impact and to change course 
without fear of undermining authority or expertise on a matter. If we are 
not sensitive to such issues, we risk causing additional strain on the public 
and our institutions, for example, through loss of trust.  
• Achieving resilience may require that we have responsible government and 
that those entrusted with institutions that play an important role in our 
ability to sustain functioning during a pandemic (e.g., public health officials, 
healthcare professionals, researchers, etc.) are working in the best interest 
of the defined goals of the community. Were such stakeholders to act out of 
some other interest or were failing in meeting their responsibilities, it is 
reasonable to have concern that our ability to ‘absorb strain’ may be 
compromised. The ability to hold people accountable may help to ensure 
that those the public relies on are acting in the public's interest. 
 
Bavel, J. J. V., Baicker, K., Boggio, P. S., Capraro, V., Cichocka, A., Cikara, M., ... & 
Willer, R. (2020). Using social and behavioural science to support COVID-19 
pandemic response. Nature human behaviour, 4(5), 460-471. 
Literatuuroverzicht, gaat meer over hoe tijdens de pandemie het vertrouwen op te wekken dat 
nodig is voor naleving. 
• Economic position and racial inequality are also associated with levels of 
trust in social institutions, including the healthcare system. Racial and ethnic 
minority communities, in particular, have both historical and contemporary 
experiences of discrimination, leading to distrust70,71,72,73,74. Members of 
these communities may be more likely to be wary about the public health 
information they receive, less willing to adopt recommended safety 
Pagina 36 van 43
