MIT advies 2023-2 
measures and potentially more susceptible to ‘fake news’. This suggests 
Datum 
the need for more targeted public health information and for 
22-02-2023 
 
partnerships between public health authorities and trusted 
 
organizations that are internal to these communities. 
• Reliable information and public health messages are needed from national 
leaders and central health officials. But local voices can amplify these 
messages and help build the trust that is needed to spur behavioural 
change. 
• Experimental studies clarify what leaders can do to promote trust leading to 
cooperation. A priority for leaders is to create a sense of shared social 
identity amongst their followers199. A large body of research suggests 
that people tend to prefer leaders who cultivate a sense that ‘we are all in 
this together’200. In part, such leadership gives people a sense of collective 
self-efficacy and hope201. More importantly, though, it provides a 
psychological platform for group members to coordinate efforts to tackle 
stressors202. Without leadership, there is a risk that people will avoid acts 
of citizenship and instead embrace a philosophy of ‘everyone for 
themselves’. 
 
Habersaat, K. B., Betsch, C., Danchin, M., Sunstein, C. R., Böhm, R., Falk, A., ... & 
Butler, R. (2020). Ten considerations for effectively managing the COVID-19 
transition. Nature human behaviour, 4(7), 677-687. 
Literatuuroverzicht, gaat meer over hoe tijdens de pandemie het vertrouwen op te wekken dat 
nodig is voor naleving. 
Transparent communication of what is known, what is not known and what 
efforts are being taken to learn more can contribute to building a sense of 
trust65,66,67. Knowing the rationale for decisions makes it easier for people to 
internalise them into mechanisms of intrinsic motivation68, so scientific advice to 
governments should be transparent and not subject to political or government 
influence.  
Stakeholder coordination also contributes to trust as it generates consistency and 
reinforcement of messages65. Governments can obtain the support of individuals 
or groups who enjoy high levels of trust to communicate important messages or 
to reach more population groups in culturally and linguistically diverse populations 
(for example, religious leaders, former politicians and public figures from the arts, 
culture and sports). Moreover, robust democratic infrastructures for community 
voices and pathways for these voices to be translated into decision-making can 
help to maintain trust69.  
Open access to relevant information expressed in culturally sensitive language 
can also contribute to a transparent system70.  
Community engagement can demonstrate that the population is being heard 
and that their views are being considered by decision-makers71,72 and promote 
trust.  
Pagina 37 van 43
