Summary
Engaged neighbourhoods
Experiences of residents and professionals with
neighbourhood improvement in four past and present
priority neighbourhoods
S.1 Purpose of this study
A review of the ’40 neighbourhoods policy’ from a new perspective
Over the last ten to twenty years, there have been any number of initiatives in the Nether-
lands to improve the situation and satisfaction levels of residents living in disadvantaged
neighbourhoods. The neighbourhood action plans for the 40 ‘priority neighbourhoods’
(aandachtswijken) which the then Minister for Housing, Communities and Integration, Ella
Vogelaar, earmarked in 2007 for additional efforts, were largely built on earlier initiatives,
such as the urban policy for the larger cities (Grotestedenbeleid). That policy was still in force
when the plan was announced for intensified action in 40 designated neighbourhoods in
18 cities, in a bid to accelerate the improvements there. Broad goals were formulated
around better housing, education, labour participation, safety and integration. To these
goals were later added health, sport and culture – all areas in which there was major dep-
rivation in the designated neighbourhoods. The aim was to eliminate the disadvantage
through a cohesive (integrated) approach on several fronts, with the emphases within the
broad objectives being added locally to meet the particular needs of the neighbourhood.
Administrators, professionals and large numbers of residents of the neighbourhoods con-
cerned enthusiastically set up new initiatives or continued with existing ones, although it
was not long before the promised funding from central government started to dry up.
Many people felt that the supplementary policy came to a halt in 2012, when government
investments totalling approximately 300 million euros up to that point came to an end.
Formally, the 40-neighbourhoods policy runs until 2017. Recently, housing associations
have been reminded to restrict themselves to their core tasks, namely building and man-
aging affordable rented housing. Police reforms mean that the force is also focusing more
on its core tasks and adopting less of an area-wide approach. Local authorities have had to
prepare and implement decentralisations in the social domain within a very short space of
time, and now have to deliver more care provisions with fewer resources. All of this is
combined with a call to citizens to do more in the public domain and to take responsibil-
ity for their immediate residential setting.
In this study we look at the 40-neighbourhoods policy, but also at the preceding years, in
order to gain a better picture of the changes of course around the time the 40-neighbour-
hoods policy was introduced. We interviewed residents, businesses and professionals in
