betrokken wijken
four neighbourhoods in order to elicit their experiences with local initiatives and results.
Earlier research by the Netherlands Institute for Social Research¦ scp on ‘priority neigh-
bourhoods’ (Werk aan de Wijk, Permentier et al. 2013) traced the added value of the 40-
neighbourhoods policy using statistics on safety and liveability. The study revealed posi-
tive trends in the neighbourhoods in terms of liveability and (perceived) safety, a decrease
in the concentration of low income households and a more positive perception of devel-
opments in the neighbourhood. Disappointing for those directly involved was the caveat
that similar improvements had also occurred in other deprived neighbourhoods and had
moreover begun long before the start of the 40-neighbourhoods policy. The optimistic
feelings, however, were more bounded to the 40 neighbourhoods residents.
At around the same time, research was published under the title Urban40, which looked at
the potential health effects of the 40-neighbourhoods policy. The researchers found posi-
tive and distinctive health results for the 40 neighbourhoods, especially in relation to
stress. Despite the crisis, smoking had increased in the neighbourhoods to a lesser extent
than elsewhere, while perceived mental health had improved and the use of mental
health care had increased, possibly indicating a better response to the latent need.
The more interventions that were made in the neighbourhoods, the bigger the improve-
ments in health. These positive results were welcomed in the media, but the researchers
also looked for further explanations for their results.
In a bid to explain such results as these better, in this study we wanted to talk to stake-
holders in the neighbourhoods. We did this through four case studies, studying four
neighbourhoods where we spoke to residents, professionals and local businesses. We also
made observations in the neighbourhoods and used literature to help explain our find-
ings. This approach is complementary to our earlier study on the priority neighbourhoods
(Permentier et al. 2013). That study was mainly quantitative; our study is mainly qualita-
tive and is told in the words of stakeholders. We attempt to offer an insight into how and
under what circumstances efforts by stakeholders contribute to improving the liveability
of neighbourhoods. Respondents together tell the story about what has happened in their
neighbourhoods and what is still happening. How do different people describe the same
processes? The research questions are presented individually in section S.3. They are about
the interventions and what made them successful or otherwise; they talk about the inte-
grated approach, about the personal factor (best persons), about the role of residents and
businesses, lessons for decentralisation in the social domain and finally about clarifying
and explaining earlier (quantitative) studies.
Choice of neighbourhoods
We chose four early post-war neighbourhoods: Nieuwland in the town of Schiedam, Kruis-
kamp in Amersfoort (since removed from the list of priority neighbourhoods), and the
Slotervaart and Bijlmer K neighbourhoods in Amsterdam. To help us make this choice we
carried out a preliminary study to investigate what had happened in each of the 40 priority
neighbourhoods between 2002 and 2006/2007 and between 2007 and 2012, using
national statistics on liveability and safety, and taking into account the local context.
224
