summary
Among other things, the preliminary study showed that post-war neighbourhoods
improved less (on average) than pre-war neighbourhoods, and we therefore chose post-
war neighbourhoods, which also had the advantage that the study was focused on similar
neighbourhoods in terms of architecture and urban development. Unexpectedly, three of
the four neighbourhoods chosen had improved considerably. According to our data and
analyses, this was not the case for Nieuwland, which appeared to offer an interesting con-
trast. Another factor in the choice was our desire for a degree of distribution across the
country and the motivation of municipalities to take part, which was high in all the neigh-
bourhoods chosen, and especially in Nieuwland. In Slotervaart, we chose a postcode area
which, in contrast to the other three neighbourhoods, has seen virtually no demolition or
new development since the neighbourhood was first built.
Interviews
A total of 60 interviews were held with around 100 people. The professional network in
each of the neighbourhoods was first mapped out as accurately as possible. This network
consists of neighbourhood managers and local authority and housing association coordi-
nators, officials responsible for the public space, and professionals from the fields of wel-
fare, education, work and income, voluntary organisations, sport and games. The inter-
views with these professionals shed light on the number of residents and businesses, with
whom interviews were also held. In order to ensure that people outside the network of
professionals were also interviewed, businesses and residents were also approached
directly. The focus here was on diversity in terms of age, cultural background and degree
of active engagement in the neighbourhood. Representativeness was not a consideration;
the mere fact that respondents were willing to take part in the study probably means that
they were self-selecting in the sense of feeling engaged with their neighbourhood.
We did not conduct the same number of interviews in all neighbourhoods: there were
more in Nieuwland, where we began, and fewer in Slotervaart. Most of the residents inter-
viewed lived older properties, and less in new-build, often owner-occupied homes.
The people we spoke to living in older properties were not a random sample, but were
predominantly people who had lived in the neighbourhood for some time and therefore
had a good view of the changes that had taken place. We focused mainly on the question
of what the neighbourhood improvement had meant for the incumbent population, and
less on what had prompted people to move into the neighbourhood from elsewhere.
We probably spoke to the most important individuals in each neighbourhood in terms of
their contribution to creating and maintaining a clean, tidy, social and safe residential
setting. That was deliberate, as it enabled us to build a fairly comprehensive picture for
this theme. The picture for interventions relating to goals such as parenting and learning,
work, integration, sport, culture and health is more fragmented, with so many different
partners involved in these initiatives that it was impossible to speak to all of them.
We used a snowball technique to lead us to key persons such as neighbourhood coordina-
tors, housing association staff and volunteers, and may therefore have missed interesting
