betrokken wijken
partners. An exhaustive inventory was not compiled of these goals, but we drew lessons
from the experiences of the many people that we did speak to.
S.2 Key findings
First we will discuss the main findings of the study. What was the most striking, surprising
or welcome finding for the future? In this section we present the findings in chronologi-
cal order and do not break them down by individual research questions, because those
questions often impinge on each other for different themes. In section S.3 we look at the
other findings on the basis of the individual research questions, drawing from the con-
cluding discussions in the individual chapters. A number of text boxes present a very brief
outline of special features in the four neighbourhoods.
S.2.1 The reclamation phase
– The biggest steps to improving liveability and safety in the four neighbourhoods had
already taken place before 2007: physical renewal, tackling crime with an emphasis on
juvenile criminal groups, and improved maintenance through joint (integrated)
action by local authority and housing associations, tighter supervision of outsourced
street cleaning services and the building of underground waste containers.
The earlier scp report ‘Working on the neighbourhood’ (Werk aan de Wijk) established that
the 40-neighbourhoods policy had not delivered any demonstrable added value for livea-
bility and safety (Permentier et al. 2013). In our study it became clear why: a great deal had
already been achieved under the prevailing urban policy, and this also applied in other
deprived neighbourhoods besides the 40 designated neighbourhoods. That explains the
improvements; precisely the topics evaluated in our study were the subject of powerful
policy in the period 2002-2007, including the radical physical renewal that had already
been completed in part and/or organised at administrative level and communicated to
residents. This had therefore already created the promise of improvement. Also impor-
tant, including in ‘our’ neighbourhoods, were the initiatives to tackle crime. Prosaic
aspects such as improved waste collection and street cleaning also improved the appear-
ance of the neighbourhoods.
Typical of the ‘empowered neighbourhoods’ (krachtwijkenbeleid) was the breadth of the
goals – not just housing and safety, but also education, labour participation, integration,
health, sport and culture – and the simultaneous and integrated way in which those
themes were addressed. According to our interviewees, the change from a top-down
approach (in which local authorities and housing associations sought to reverse the nega-
tive statistics and win back the trust of residents) to giving a more central role to residents.
According to the Netherlands Scientific Council for Government Policy (wrr), the phase of
‘social re-engagement’, the regaining of trust through decisive action by administrators,
was followed by a phase of “opportunity-driven policy that tempts residents into action by
