summary
appealing to their needs and qualities and giving them the scope to shape their own
neighbourhood.” (wrr 2005: 12). The process advocated by the wrr is recognisable in
each of the neighbourhoods.
Professionals saw the notion of working with residents to set priorities as a turning point,
and active residents in particular have warm memories of the visit by the then Minister for
Housing, Communities and Integration, Ella Vogelaar. Attention and interest from profes-
sionals and freedom for residents goes down well. This may explain why residents in the
40 priority neighbourhoods were more positive in their thoughts and views about their
neighbourhood in around 2009 than in earlier years and than those in other neighbour-
hoods. It is possible that the move to allowing greater input from residents in their neigh-
bourhoods –a change in ownership –would not have got off the ground without the
momentum from the national movement in that direction. Allowing greater input from
residents is important in building satisfaction with the neighbourhood further so as to
create good, sustainable and affordable neighbourhood management.
– Neighbourhood professionals unanimously advocate physical renewal in priority
neighbourhoods. Residents are satisfied in retrospect, but are more critical of the pol-
icy of relocating tenants with personal problems.
As well as the local authority and housing associations – which together made and imple-
mented the plans – the social welfare professionals to whom we spoke in the three neigh-
bourhoods where major physical restructuring has taken place also firmly believed that
without that restructuring it would have been impossible to tackle the social and other
problems. The large stock of cheap housing created such an accumulation of problems
that it was necessary to thin out those problems in order to be able to address them. The
process also offered an opportunity to get a foot in the door and refer a number of tenants
with personal problems to organisations that could offer help.
Restructuring was thus seen as an indispensable intervention. The situation in Slotervaart
(where no restructuring had taken place) does little to detract from this finding, because
the built environment here was already quite varied, with more readily marketable houses
alongside the many flats. On the tight Amsterdam housing market, the promise that
homes might yet be replaced or refurbished was enough to make people satisfied despite
the small size of the homes. This was not the case in municipalities with less housing mar-
ket pressure, such as Schiedam.
Two issues that are relevant for policy were raised by residents in our interviews. The first
was the relocation of problem tenants to other neighbourhoods, and whether adminis-
trators in those destination neighbourhoods were equipped to support them (we shall
return to this in section S.2.3.). The second is that a number of tenants felt it was unwise
to move to a new home with higher rent given their financial circumstances. The profes-
sionals we spoke to did not see a financial problem as long as rent benefit is available for
the new homes. Several tenants evidently see this differently.
