betrokken wijken
The great value attached by professionals to physical renewal raises questions about how
this will be achieved in the future with fewer resources, as new concentrations of poor
residents gradually develop in other neighbourhoods, for example in growth municipali-
ties. It is then wise to thinking about alternatives to physical intervention, such as
strengthening the help and support infrastructure. The example of the klusflats (flats des-
tined for demolition which are instead offered for renovation) in the Bijlmer district of
Amsterdam also shows that demolition which appeared inevitable can sometimes be
averted in a creative way.
S.2.2 After the reclamation: reaping the rewards
Once the neighbourhoods had been reclaimed through restructuring and robust mainte-
nance, professionals were faced with the question of how to maintain and develop this
basic level, with residents’ priorities as the starting point, in accordance with the opportu-
nity-driven policy ideal referred to earlier. In our study we encountered any number of
projects and initiatives for this. We will limit ourselves here to two central principles that
are decisive in the positive experiences of our respondents and that also emerged in sev-
eral policy fields. We summarise these principles as ‘meeting expectations’ and ‘accessible
pivotal figure’.
Meeting expectations: achievement or adjustment
– Neighbourhood improvement goes hand in hand with rising expectations of resi-
dents. They set higher standards for their living environment, which means that abso-
lute improvements do not always translate into a reduction in complaints or higher
satisfaction scores: working on the neighbourhood is never done.
Liveability is measured mainly on the basis of resident appreciation. A crucial factor here
is therefore whether the quality of the living environment exceeds or falls short of their
expectations, quite apart from the actual condition of the neighbourhood. And it is pre-
cisely here that our visits to the neighbourhoods revealed a fly in the ointment. A key
finding in our study is that those expectations are dynamic, and in two ways. First, people
become accustomed to the better conditions in the neighbourhood: rising expectations
can cause them to redirect their complaints from the threat of drug users to noisy school-
children, from broken shop windows to litter and dog fouling. Second, the physical
renewal attracts new groups of owner-occupier residents in the new-build homes, who
are tempted into the neighbourhood by promising renewal plans. Buyers are more partic-
ular about their surroundings and generally plan to stay for a longer period. They there-
fore bring with them high expectations and demands. This dynamic of expectations
means that a reduction in problems does not always lead to a permanent reduction in
nuisance and complaints. We can attach two implications to this.
First, absolute improvements may receive too little attention in statistics used by local
authorities as a basis for their policy. Nuisance exists in the eye of the beholder. Rising
228
