summary
aspirations and more assertive citizens can lead to the number of complaints staying
largely unchanged, or even to unfavourable scores in population surveys, even though the
severity of the underlying problems has reduced.
A second implication is that work on the neighbourhood is never finished. Restructuring
and tackling crime had led to improvements even before 2007, but the principle holds
here that staying at the top is harder than getting to the top – not only because of the risk
of falling back again, but also because the raised expectations make clear that a single
catch-up exercise is not enough and that permanent attention is needed. Handing back
the opportunity-driven ideal for a neighbourhood to the community should then not be
equated to abandoning all efforts. In our study visits, attention was repeatedly focused on
characteristics of interventions that had proved to be helpful in this regard, precisely
because they directly addressed the expectations of residents:
– Maintaining liveability means meeting the expectations of residents. This is helped by
acting responsively (consistent, rapid, visible and flexible), structural solutions, work-
ing with residents and managing expectations.
Meeting expectations: acting responsively
Little is so damaging to residents’ trust in local authorities as the feeling of not being
taken seriously. If the expectation are created that resident’ concerns and needs are the
main factor shaping neighbourhood actions, but there is no adequate response when res-
idents come forward with specific suggestions or complaints, the result is disillusion. The
willingness of residents to do something for themselves also depends on how much con-
fidence they have that they will receive support from the authorities. Even simply report-
ing incidents – entirely out of self-interest – can then be seen as pointless. Being respon-
sive means in the first place responding consistently and quickly to reports from residents.
Residents generally take a rapid response almost for granted, and not something that
deserves bonus points; but they are quick to judge a lack of response as negative.
Responding consistently and quickly must not be confused with a ‘you say jump, we ask
how high’ response, as we will discuss later under managing expectations (see Adjusting
expectations: communication). However, reasonable appeals to public responsibility
should preferably not be allowed to disappear into the oblivion of capacity shortages. An
automated confirmation of receipt will not be regarded as a rapid response.
Second, visible action contributes to responsiveness. Where supervisors, cleaners, neigh-
bourhood coordinators, help and support professionals and even administrators make
themselves visible in the neighbourhood, this induces appreciation and positivism. The
same applies for taking measures visibly: visible interventions are very direct way of com-
municating that a close eye is being kept on things, and a presence in the neighbourhood
also fosters information gathering and facilitates preventive action.
Third, coordination and flexibility between the different parties can promote responsiveness.
In the past, there was a tendency to refer residents from one professional to another,
because tasks and responsibilities were strictly separated or because the incoming ques-
