betrokken wijken
tion impinged on different areas of expertise and it was unclear who was the most appro-
priate person to answer it. It is essential to avoid citizens being pushed from pillar to post;
it is better if professionals are willing to step in for each other and coordinate behind the
scenes. In the neighbourhoods in our study, serious efforts have been made to achieve
this coordination, sometimes between housing associations and the local authority,
sometimes in safety networks or, more recently, in the neighbourhood community
teams, where implementation still requires some optimisation in relation to specialist
care. The principle of one point of contact is one of the goals of the integrated approach,
and there is added value here in the form of working together. Moreover, this cuts two
ways: coordination and flexibility within a network also avoid duplication for professio-
nals. This can arise if citizens have to contact several bodies with the same question, but
also if they approach different bodies on their own initiative in order to increase the
chance of receiving help.
Meeting expectations: structural solutions
A second feature of interventions that meet citizens’ expectations is their sustainability.
The term ‘project carousel’ is sometimes used pejoratively to describe the many short-
lived projects initiated during and prior to the 40-neighbourhoods approach. The criti-
cism was not aimed so much at the individual projects as at their ephemeral nature. Some
of them were promising, and that is precisely the problem: people’s enthusiasm was awo-
ken to organise or take part in an activity, only for them to be left high and dry shortly
afterwards. Isolated residents have for example no sooner made new contacts during a
meeting initiative than they lose them again; or the hard shell of problem youngsters has
just been penetrated through a sports programme, when they are sent back onto the
streets again. There are many reasons for the short-lived nature of projects, often money-
related, but sometimes entirely coincidental, such as a pivotal person who moves on to
other activities.
By structural solutions we mean not only long-lasting solutions, but also solutions that do
not simply move the problem somewhere else. Closing an off-licence whose customers
are causing nuisance makes life better for local residents, but creates a new problem for
those living near the late shop a little further away. Providing a space for groups of young-
sters to gather emerged as a successful strategy in our interviews, but also carries a high
risk of displacing problems. This can be addressed by working with local residents – and if
possible with the street groups themselves – to look for an alternative location which
does have public support. The trap of knee-jerk, temporary or half-solutions is that they
first raise residents’ hopes and expectations, to be followed by disillusion, possibly caus-
ing more damage to the trust in professionals than if there had been no intervention.
Adjusting expectations: communication
The factors above help in meeting expectations. Sometimes, however, the expectations
themselves are the problem and it is impossible or even undesirable to meet them. The
first important consideration is that professionals and volunteers do not create or prolong
230
