summary
unrealistic expectations. It helps here if new and existing residents are occasionally
reminded about the problems of the past and if attention is focused on the results of ini-
tiatives. Expectations also sometimes have to be actively scaled down. It is not always clear
to residents why some measures are not possible, and in particular it is by no means
always clear to them where the responsibility of government and professionals stops and
their own begins. We found one of the clearest examples of this in the deployment of the
police in cases of nuisance. If the situation is not overly threatening, residents could
themselves first approach those causing the nuisance personally. According to a great
many assertive residents we spoke to, the results can be very impressive. And residents can
be on the scene more quickly than the police. Even assuming the police have time to turn
out for nuisance reports, they are often powerless when they arrive, because the volume
of the ghetto-blaster has already been turned down and the beer bottles have been hid-
den. This clear lack of power dents the trust of citizens in the police and the willingness to
report incidents.
If it is not possible to respond adequately to a reported problem, it is important to explain
why, initially to the resident making the report, but preferably also to a wider public.
Housing associations in our study proved to be well aware of the importance of direct
communication, even when the answer is ‘no’. Before giving this answer, professionals
could ask themselves whether, if they are not able to meet the request, one of their net-
work partners might be able to do so (see ‘coordination and flexibility’ under Meeting
expectations: responsive action). The threatened sharp increase in the workload of those
working in neighbourhoods due to the spending cuts means that careful management of
expectations is becoming even more important. Discussions are for example under way in
the police on whether they should become less involved in social and health issues and
concentrate more on their core tasks. The police already have to be very selective in priori-
tising reports, and it is plausible that this selectivity will increase in the near future. An
answer will have to be found to this.
Meeting and adjusting expectations: acting together
Cooperation with citizens can take different forms. Here we are referring to the teams in
which citizens and professionals work together to identify the nature of the problems,
what should have priority in which location, and what the possible causes and solutions
are. In some cases, they also share responsibility for implementing solutions. Examples
include neighbourhood representation teams (wijkschouwteams), neighbourhood safety
teams (buurtveiligheidsteams) and neighbourhood forums (buurttafels ).
These teams give citizens an opportunity to formulate their expectations and allow pro-
fessionals to gain a good impression of what residents want. Those expectations can sub-
sequently be translated into shared goals on which there is consensus, as well as on the
best approach. That gives rise to shared support. This structure means that citizens’
expectations do not simply become a problem of the professional, but that citizens take
co-ownership of problems and solutions. Cooperation in teams is then not just a valuable
instrument for meeting expectations, but also for when they need to be adjusted. If
231
