betrokken wijken
expectations are unrealistic, this often becomes clear during the process, because every-
one shares responsibility for finding a solution which they can then see is not achievable.
An important caveat needs to be applied to cooperation in teams. Participants, especially
the professionals, always need to be aware that active residents do not necessarily speak
for the whole community. Although mutual trust promotes flexible cooperation, close-
knit contacts must not lead to the formation of an impenetrable ‘inner circle’. In order to
remain sensitive to alternative views and innovative solutions, it is vital to constantly
search for fresh and sometimes tangential branches in the network.
An assessable pivotal figure: point of contact, bridge-builder and lubricator
– A pivotal figure with a clearly defined remit is important as a practical point of contact
and bridge-builder. A familiar face that is regularly seen in the neighbourhood also
motivates professionals and active residents to make their contribution – oiling the
wheels.
A second principle that shows promise in various domains (in addition to matching
expectations) is the added value of having accessible and approachable pivotal figures in
strategic positions in the neighbourhood. This need not be one central figure who holds
all the strings and puts everyone in touch with everyone: such ambitious integration
could lead to a hopeless tangle of crossed connections which requires so much ingenious
planning and coordination that any gains in efficiency and decisiveness are quickly lost.
We were particularly struck by the efficiency of and appreciation for people who were able
to reach and bring together residents within a reasonably well-defined domain a retail
area manager, to name one example. Such a pivotal figure can perform at least three use-
ful functions in the neighbourhood.
First, he or she acts as a point of contact for stakeholders around a given policy theme, so
that residents no longer have to go to different professionals with different questions.
From their position as a central point of contact, they are able to pass the questions to the
relevant people or suggest solutions themselves, provided they have been equipped to do
so by the local authority. This is the one-stop shop idea of the integrated approach.
Second, he or she has an overview of the field and is able to bring together parties on the
basis of supply and demand, additional competences, etc.. Without an active bridge-
builder, it is not certain that stakeholders will find each other, or possibly only by chance.
Third, he or she can become a trusted figure in the neighbourhood, who facilitates per-
sonal contacts, short lines of communication and ultimately builds mutual trust. Precisely
this personal contact and mutual trust are cited as reasons in our neighbourhoods for the
fact that the cooperation ran so smoothly, effectively and continuously, though it is
important to guard against creating an overly tight and closed inner circle. But the per-
sonal approach not only proved to lubricate relations between professionals: residents are
also much more likely to be persuaded to play an active role in the neighbourhood if they
are called upon to do so by people they are familiar with, than by general communica-
tions through flyers or at meetings. It is very possible that this also applies for the con-
232
