summary
tinuing motivation of volunteers. A coordinating, permanent figure can not only provide
practical support, but also offer the personal attention needed to keep people motivated.
S.2.3 Austerity measures and decentralisation
Following the momentum of a national movement to clean up the ‘empowered neigh-
bourhoods’ through a pooling of strengths and heavy resident involvement, new develop-
ments followed in rapid succession. The crisis thwarted further physical renewal, but so
did spending cuts imposed on local authorities, which were felt in neighbourhoods
through the closure of community centres and cultural amenities such as libraries, and
staff cutbacks particularly in the areas of welfare and community work. To this can be
added the decentralisation of responsibility for social provisions, facing local authorities
with the task of finding ways of fulfilling these major responsibilities. The tide for hous-
ing associations changed in anticipation of the new Housing Act, which forced them to
refocus on their core tasks and consequently exclude a number of initiatives within neigh-
bourhoods. Sizeable landlord levies reinforced this focus on core tasks. In 2005, the wrr
was actually saying that housing associations would become commissioners of welfare
work. The euphoria surrounding the shared task in neighbourhoods, for which national
attention and resources had also been mobilised, has ebbed away somewhat, although
our interviews revealed that there is still great ambition. Some also believe that spending
cuts can help lead to creative innovations, such as the G1000 initiative and the community
enterprise in Kruiskamp (see Box) and the temporary configuration of the Wibautplein
area in Nieuwland (see Box). On the other hand, concerns emerged about two related
themes: maintaining the social infrastructure in the neighbourhood and the organisation
of help and support services.
Social infrastructure requires maintenance
– Residents and housing associations attach great importance to meeting in the neigh-
bourhood. The action radius of residents is sometimes remarkably small. Meeting
others promotes feelings of safety, removes people from isolation, motivates them to
action and helps in the early identification of problems. This social infrastructure
needs investment.
Meeting other people is not mentioned as one of the national goals for the 40-neighbour-
hoods policy, probably as it is often instrumental for ‘higher’ goals which are mentioned,
such as feelings of safety, health or integration. A few local authority plans, especially in
Nieuwland, do mention this topic explicitly. Many people we spoke to attach great impor-
tance to meeting others within the neighbourhood and also within their own residential
setting. That feeling appears to be strongest among housing associations. Meeting others
contributes to public familiarity, thereby improving feelings of safety. In addition, it
removes residents from their isolation, which can be important for their mental well-
233
