betrokken wijken
being. It is then a form of low-threshold mutual willingness to help. Finally, meeting
forums are also places where potential volunteers can be found and possibly recruited.
Housing associations, in particular, stress that people should be able to meet others close
to their homes, in their own residential setting, and regret the closure of community cen-
tres, libraries and other meeting points, as do the residents who used them. An indication
of the limited radius of action of many neighbourhood residents, apart from the physical
barriers presented by railways and main roads when visiting facilities, is participation in
sport. This is substantially lower among residents of priority neighbourhoods, but
increased sharply in Nieuwland once sports associations began showing themselves in the
neighbourhood with activities.
Several community and neighbourhood centres in the four neighbourhoods have been
closed, along with cultural facilities. Many regret this, but there are also voices (in local
authorities and in one case a business) which argue that activities can also take place else-
where, such as in sports clubs, churches, mosques or, as in Kruiskamp, in the premises of
the newly formed community enterprise. The experience of housing associations is that
people not only want to meet others within their own residential setting, but also on
‘neutral territory’. To meet this need, these associations are setting up local community
centres. Sometimes temporary premises meet this need, as in Nieuwland in locations
awaiting redevelopment. However, temporary facilities have already almost become a way
of life.
Our respondents also attach value to organising activities where different groups can
meet. The much-maligned neighbourhood barbecue is one such example. Housing asso-
ciations like to use such activities to come into contact informally with their tenants.
There is however a fairly widely shared feeling, especially among active residents, that the
spirit of the times and the financial circumstances mean that priorities need to be set for
publicly funded meeting activities, and that residents were sometimes too pampered by
having everything arranged for them.
Criteria cited by respondents for prioritisation included: civic and other initiatives must
not be too narrow, but must offer something to different sections of the population and
preferably bring them into contact with each other; that the structural needs and prob-
lems in the community should be given priority above more festive initiatives; and that
persistent attention is preferable to a concatenation of continually changing projects.
Can residents organise activities and amenities themselves? The answer is sometimes yes
and sometimes no, while in many cases a little help is needed, in the form of subtle sup-
port from a distance, for example from a welfare worker. This can provide moral support,
for example in overcoming administrative hurdles and if necessary helping to hold
together the mutual relations. Self-management proves vulnerable to subtle forms of
parochialisation of provisions by the most dominant group (‘That’s how we always do
things here’) and therefore demands – albeit limited – input from an outsider with profes-
sional status. This fits in with the findings of other researchers, including Specht and Van
der Zwaard (2015) and Tonkens (2014).
