summary
Volunteers with the qualities of professionals do exist, as Specht and Van der Zwaard
(2015) show in their book about the Reading Room (Leeszaal) in Rotterdam, which is led by
two academically trained volunteers. We also found residents who sometimes performed
better than paid officials, or who are able to reach a population group others find difficult
to access. But this must not lead to overambitious expectations about what volunteers can
achieve. Some residents do not feel sufficiently competent, and some roles are then not
filled. The Buitenkasten toy library in Kruiskamp is an example; the library, which also
serves as a meeting point for mothers, is only able to open for limited hours due to a lack
of volunteers. Volunteers who do have the necessary competencies are often under pres-
sure to accept remuneration. Some succeed in being paid for their efforts, while others
seek out voluntary work in strategic locations in the hope that it will lead to paid work.
This is becoming difficult as more jobs are pushed from the welfare and professional
domain into the voluntary sphere. Several residents in our study were indignant about the
dismissal of professionals from the neighbourhood. As one resident of Kruiskamp but it:
‘So does that mean there’s nothing between pampering and ‘get on with it yourselves’?’.
Such practices sometimes also bring embarrassment to volunteers and voluntary organi-
sations. The noble volunteer can effectively be taking the bread out of the mouth of a fel-
low resident.
Decentralisation in social domain creates demand for help
– Local presence of a neighbourhood support team can make it so much easier for peo-
ple to ask for help that preventing (escalation of) problems is difficult because the
demand for help increases so much. Decentralisation therefore demands more rather
than fewer resources.
The new help and support structure in the neighbourhoods in our study is still in its
infancy; it has been in place for the longest in Nieuwland, where the neighbourhood sup-
port team set up in the community centre in 2012 – at the same time putting pressure on
the function of the community centre as a meeting place. Something similar happened in
Kruiskamp, where the help and support team was set up a year ago in what shortly before
that had been built and used as a meeting point. The theory behind this integrated
approach, based on case management and providing a single coach for each family in
need, is endorsed, but has in practice thus far mainly highlighted problems.
First, experience has shown that, at least initially (and in Nieuwland for more than two
years now), there was a sharp rise in demand for help. Proximity plays a role here, as does
the ease with which people can return for further visits. In our neighbourhoods, discus-
sions were held in advance in individual resident’s homes, with professionals taking the
initiative. They selected a number of addresses and made the visits at their own pace.
The neighbourhood support team members are not able to allocate helpers themselves
and feel unvalued.
At the same time, professionals and residents have the impression that there are just as
many barriers to visiting the neighbourhood support team. Anxiety or embarrassment
235
