betrokken wijken
play a role here, along with unfamiliarity with the address or the lack of recognisable staff,
for example people with the same cultural background as those using the service. In a
team of generalists, this latter point can be mitigated through the choice of staff, while
referrals can be made from places where residents feel comfortable visiting (doctors’ sur-
geries, schools, churches and mosques). This does however require a high probability of
adequate follow-up, which means adequate staffing. Otherwise there is a risk of disillu-
sionment (including among those making referrals), thus undermining trust in the partic-
ipating bodies and the government more generally.
A third problem relates to the limited mandate of the generalist front-office agents.
The help they offer sometimes runs into difficulties when second-line help is needed, for
which an indication is needed. Despite help and support workers being brought together
in a single location, in practice they have little time to learn from each other.
Fourthly, there are doubts about the assumed contribution from the networks of many of
those seeking help: does that network actually exist and are its members sufficiently com-
petent? On the other hand, there have been positive experiences in relation to informa-
tive group meetings of fellow-sufferers, on parenting, use of medicines and other mat-
ters. Here, however, reliance is not placed on the network of stakeholders, but instead the
doors are thrown open to experiential and other experts from outside the network.
Finally, it has been observed that maintaining the social infrastructure in a neighbour-
hood, and organising approachable meeting places and activities, leads to greater self-
reliance, a mutual willingness to help on the part of (groups of) citizens and early identifi-
cation of problems. These are precisely the areas from which resources are now being
withdrawn massively.
S.3 Answers to the research questions
The foregoing has already shed some light on the different research questions, but addi-
tional lessons can be drawn from the individual questions. We will do this below, ques-
tion for question.
1 Which interventions do residents, businesses and professionals suggest to improve the liveability and
safety of the neighbourhood and the lives of residents? How do stakeholders assess the results and
what makes interventions successful or otherwise?
Housing: restructuring
Three of the neighbourhoods studied have seen major demolition and new-build and, as
stated, the professionals felt that this intervention was necessary. This has several advan-
tages. The large-scale rebuilding has greatly changed the appearance of the neighbour-
hoods: the architecture is more varied and the public space more attractive. Professionals
are very positive in their views on this, and other research shows that residents are also in
favour on balance, but are more focused on their very immediate setting and less on the
bigger picture. Neighbourhood residents were persuaded to take advantage of the restruc-
turing with large grants for moving home and, in the case of Kruiskamp, more luxurious
