summary
rented homes which were made affordable by the Huur op Maat rent support scheme. One
important advantage mentioned earlier is the dilution of problems, i.e. reducing the
number of residents with problems. A demolition/new-build project also requires inten-
sive contact with residents, and that creates the opportunity to point them towards help
services.
Lessons gained in Schiedam, in particular, are that the demolition and new-build need to
be properly phased, with not too much all at once, partly so that shops can retain that
clientele and to prevent open building sites lying around for too long. The price of new-
build homes must also not be too out of kilter with the existing homes and residents.
A few drawbacks were also mentioned, though they were of subordinate importance for
most respondents. They included the displacement of problems and the excessively high
new housing costs for some residents. Those ‘left behind’ in old homes of limited quality
or scheduled for demolition were sometimes troubled by this. These tenants were part of
a discourse in which their dwellings were characterised as ‘outdated’, and in anticipation
of possible later demolition, maintenance was sometimes minimised. We heard these
complaints in Nieuwland and Kruiskamp, but not in Bijlmer (in the K-neighbourhood),
probably because of the good quality of the flats in the latter neighbourhood. Moreover,
a flat is a different product from the new single-family homes, and the flats in the Bijlmer
neighbourhood are clustered, with relatively little ‘interface’ between old and new build-
ings. Finally, the marketing of the remaining flats as a ‘Bijlmermuseum’ was probably a
success factor (see Box).
New-build and home sales attract more owner-occupiers. They are more particular about
their residential setting and generally intend to stay for longer. On the other hand, home
ownership can set owners against tenants, especially if there is a large status difference
and if tenants have different habits. We did not see new residents systematically playing a
bigger role in terms of personal engagement for the neighbourhood (other than influenc-
ing administrators).
Safety
Safety is regarded as a basic condition for further neighbourhood improvement. Opti-
mism about the tackling of crime and nuisance dominates in the neighbourhoods, both
among professionals and residents. Criminal groups were first largely removed from the
streets through a combination of judicial action and offering future prospects to young
criminals (see Box on Slotervaart). Many felt that the visible presence of human supervi-
sion, by the police or other surveillants, made a major contribution to prevention and
improved feelings of safety in the public space. As stated, attention then turned to nui-
sance (or supposed nuisance), mainly caused by youngsters on the streets.
Positive experiences have been gained with offering meeting spaces to groups of young-
sters who are willing to accept it. The support of local residents for the location chosen is
important here, in order to prevent the nuisance being moved elsewhere. Views are also
positive on the supervision and support given by professionals who are able to speak to
young people in their own ‘language’. The wish was repeatedly expressed that residents
237
