betrokken wijken
themselves should also speak to these youngsters more often, but in a ‘normal’ and con-
structive way. Most young people would respond well to this, but not everyone does or
dares do that. More fundamentally, residents say that too little is invested in training,
work and housing for young people, which might prevent them being on the streets in
the first place.
Clean and tidy residential setting
Clean and tidy streets are a goal in themselves, but also contribute to feelings of safety.
That is known from the literature, but was also mentioned by the professionals we spoke
to. Maintenance and repair in our neighbourhoods are also used as a means of discourag-
ing infringement against norms and of motivating residents to engage more actively with
their neighbourhood. Major efforts were accordingly made to keep the neighbourhoods
clean, as evidenced by the descriptions of the professionals and earlier observations by the
researchers in a number of neighbourhoods in the 1990s.
Efforts to keep neighbourhoods clean and in good repair began before 2007. In addition
to the contribution from demolition and new-build, improving waste collection also
plays a role, as stated. Although the biggest improvements have already been made, this
theme is still dominant streets and current. Sliding back needs to be avoided, even when
local authority spending is being cut.
Further improvements are still being sought, including ways of making waste collection
more efficient and therefore cheaper. Ways of achieving this include further technical
innovations, for example remote measurement of whether waste containers full. There is
also a trend towards passing part of the ownership to residents, though initially this is
especially labour-intensive for the professionals.
We found examples of active engagement by residents in keeping the residential setting
clean. Residents challenge other residents who create waste about their behaviour or
clean up the litter themselves. Both approaches occur in the neighbourhoods in our
study, but are not general. A good response and follow-up to reports of things such as
illegal fly-tipping by passers-by (Bijlmer) helps here, as does praising those who clean up
spontaneously.
Other interesting practices include managing expectations, which in Nieuwland is
addressed when discussing the state of maintenance with the task force responsible for
the outdoor space (Werkgroep Buitenruimte), in which residents carry out neighbour-
hood inspections together with professionals. Implicit agreements are made about addi-
tional cleaning that residents can tackle themselves on top of the basic level of cleanliness
to be achieved by the local authority. It is striking that the demands of the local authority
in respect of things such as green maintenance are sometimes higher than those of resi-
dents. This makes it fascinating to look more closely at how the level of quality that local
authorities achieve compares with what residents consider necessary. The layout and
maintenance of green spaces is in any event something in which residents are involved
only in exceptional cases, all of them allotments, which are greatly valued by those who
use them but also by other residents.
