summary
Shops and the local economy
For many, the neighbourhood economy turns on the market and the business climate.
It depends partly on the state of the economy or – when seeking to increase the retail mix
and tackle vacancy – on the attitudes of owners of retail premises. Local authorities do not
control everything, but structural attention and good links to all parties are of great
importance. Our study showed that where retailers are able to act together and where
there is good dialogue between retailers, local authority and landlords, possibly suppor-
ted by the retail area manager, this leads to greater satisfaction about coordinating the
retail offer and makes it easier to tackle other problems.
Naturally, individual businesses also play an important role in the success of a retail area.
In the first instance, they are responsible for their own business operations. Mutual coop-
eration between businesses is important in order to be able to tackle issues that affect the
entire retail area. We found confirmation of high neighbourhood engagement and social
engagement by local businesses. We often found active business owners with lots of
energy, courage and with their hearts in the right place. We learned that a number of
them, partly out of pragmatism (limiting travel costs) and partly out of idealism, employ
people from the local neighbourhood, offer internships and sometimes also get involved
in neighbourhood help initiatives.
Sport and games
Sport and games have received plenty of attention in the neighbourhoods. Physical amen-
ities have been created for both, such as playgrounds, football pitches and tennis courts
and cages. The resources available for supervising games are by contrast diminishing.
Although this was not discussed, it is possible that the feelings of safety have improved
greatly and that more children have therefore started playing out on the neighbourhood
squares without supervision. Sometimes, however, as with the Buitenkasten toy library in
Amersfoort, the play facility can only be opened for limited amounts of time due to lack of
volunteers. By contrast, the playground association is flourishing elsewhere, for example
in Kruiskamp, but as with many sports, games and meeting others, the radius of action of
some residents is limited to their immediate residential setting.
Participation in sport receives a good deal of attention at national level, and that is reflec-
ted in the neighbourhoods. It is interesting that participation increases when sports activ-
ities are brought to the neighbourhood. Initiatives in which sports and play facilities in
the neighbourhood are opened up as far as possible for activities by local residents, such
as the Schoolplein 14 initiative to encourage primary school children to play together, and
neighbourhood sports clubs, are therefore promising.
Arts and culture
Sport appears to receive more attention than arts and culture in the neighbourhoods in
our study, probably due to the health effects and the national sports stimulus pro-
gramme. Administrators seem to have less affinity with arts and culture.However, in
Nieuwland and Kruiskamp experiences with modest arts and culture projects were
