betrokken wijken
encouraging. Initiatives from the cultural sector itself, involving visiting neighbourhoods
to scout for talent, as in the Bijlmer district during our study, are also interesting.
Integration
Integration received little explicit attention in the interviews, though this is by no means
to suggest that it received no attention in the neighbourhoods: it is interwoven through
education, the labour market, sport and games, meeting others and housing. Integration
was mentioned most often in relation to these latter two topics. Although several cultural
groups have long been embedded in the neighbourhoods, there is sometimes a sense of
remoteness and here and there of peaceful coexistence. Good contact between groups
which live close together is essential if they are to feel at home; that is why so much
importance is attached to meeting others and creating a dense infrastructure for this.
Residents experience problems mainly with the rapid influx of new groups into the old
rented housing complexes. Successful remedies including intensifying management by
providing good information about the mores. Welcome interviews also bear fruit, though
all of this is labour-intensive and therefore vulnerable in the face of spending cuts.
2 Which forms of integration emerge in the approach used within the four neighbourhoods? To what
extent does the integrated approach add value and what makes it successful or unsuccessful?
Although a comprehensive, integrated approach is not reserved for the 40-neighbour-
hoods policy, it was certainly a foundation. The goals in the 40-neighbourhoods policy
were broadly defined and many stakeholders were therefore territorially linked to a great
ambition, namely making progress on all fronts. The idea was to look for synergy in ach-
ieving different goals. The danger that was immediately recognised was that of fragmenta-
tion of attention across many goals and subgoals, as had happened in the previous urban
policy. At the same time, critics cited the risk of everything descending into a talking shop
at the expense of action.
Our impression is that people acted predominantly in the spirit of an integrated approach
and that there was no stifling practice of ‘linking everything to everything else’. At most
there were forms of consultation by way of briefings, which were attended by partners
from all domains, who then spent time listening to accounts of progress in domains
where they themselves had no control. This was the case in the Bijlmer, for example, and
in Nieuwland we heard from some people who had stepped down because they felt there
was too much sitting and talking. Short lines of communication, informal, enjoyable and
personal contacts consistently appear to be the key to forms of cooperation which
enthuse stakeholders. Most examples of an integrated approach cover a limited remit,
such as cleaning up a shopping centre, addressing safety and maintenance in the neigh-
bourhood, literally mobilising young people, or helping and supporting residents. These
smaller forms of integration are greatly appreciated. Attention was devoted in sections
S.2.2 and S.2.3 to the desirable aspects of an integrated approach (the ‘morality of inte-
grality’):
