summary
– Not pushing citizens from pillar to post.
– Exploiting a network to avoid duplication (e.g. one family, one coach).
– Using a network for adequate referral to people with the right competence to address
the problem.
– Using a network to gain a shared grip on a problem situation or group with which net-
work members all come into contact; social problems often extend over different
social domains, for which different parties have expertise or responsibility. We saw
several examples of this quest for synergy, such as cooperation in relation to safety
(police, youth workers, municipal public spaces), improving retail areas (local busi-
nesses, shopping street managers, local authority, property owners, police) and
improving sports participation in the neighbourhood and therefore health (schools,
education, local authority, private funds).
– Seeing things in perspective. Not acting in a way that is penny wise, pound foolish,
but having sight of the consequences for other partners as well.
– Creating support among all stakeholders; everyone pulling in the same direction for a
better and more efficient result.
– Something for everyone. This did not emerge explicitly in the interviews, but our
impression is that simultaneously addressing issues that affect different groups of res-
idents strengthens the trust in administrators and professionals. If attention were
given successively to new-build occupiers, older people, young people or residents
with problems, the other groups might easily feel ignored. A simultaneous approach
creates an impression that the neighbourhood is being improved for everyone.
3 What role does the personal factor play among administrators, executive professionals, residents and
local businesses in improving liveability? What competences deliver added value? What makes the per-
sonal factor successful or unsuccessful?
In the terminology of the wrr report Vertrouwen in de buurt (‘Trust in the neighbourhood’)
(wrr 2005), which was later adopted by the Minister for Housing, Communities and Inte-
gration, Ella Vogelaar, there were powerful administrators with the personal drive and
charisma to force a difference. In the years thereafter, the literature devoted more atten-
tion to the personal factor, with attention broadening to best persons, usually professio-
nals, though they could also be residents (Van den Brink et al. 2012). We did not monitor
the respondents closely enough to be able to test the typology presented by Van den Brink
et al. (2012) in practice. The characters they describe and on the basis of which they cre-
ated their typology were however recognisable: the people who simply get on with things
every day, the front-line workers, the social entrepreneurs and the bridge-builders.
There are people who are regarded by everyone as indispensable for the neighbourhood:
the initiators of familiar bottom-up projects, the neighbourhood mayors, the people who
act as linchpins between different networks, but also the professionals who are praised
and followed by residents. Also mentioned were people who are visible, recognisable and
approachable in the neighbourhood.
241
