betrokken wijken
It is not always clear here who earns the credits and who sets the standards. In the litera-
ture, this also depends on the function that someone fulfils and how strategic it is. We
barely spoke to any administrators, whereas that is probably the level at which the per-
sonal factor can have the most wide-ranging impact. Among those doing the more hands-
on work, which included most of our interviewees, personal qualities lead to mini-suc-
cesses in a more limited area or theme (clean, complete, safe; learning; doing business).
No uniform set of characteristics emerged in the interviews which apply in every role.
Within a given role, for example the administration of the neighbourhood or district, it
can also be a case of ‘the right person at the right time’, for example when Ahmed Mar-
couch was succeeded as district council chairman by Ahmed Baâdoud, both of whom were
praised for their different qualities. This adds to the point about having the right person
in the right place (as mentioned by Van den Brink et al. (2012)). This also makes planning
and scouting difficult: how will the ideal profile develop, given the changes in the neigh-
bourhood and in the tasks? Moreover, the character, priorities or skills of professionals or
residents may develop gradually. We also had the impression that the appointment of key
individuals was sometimes a matter of taste. The question is therefore how far the per-
sonal factor is something that can be planned. The appointment of key figures in strategic
positions in a network is by contrast something that can be planned (§S.2.2), and it can
then only be hoped that they will develop into someone who is better able than others to
fulfil their task as a point of contact, bridge-builder and lubricator.
4 How are residents and businesses involved in the policy and with what result? To what extent do their
own initiatives contribute to the liveability of their neighbourhood?
In answering this question, we looked at different forms of resident input, depending on
who initiated it: from civic initiatives in which residents took the lead, to regular consul-
tation initiated by administrators.
Civic initiatives
Examples of civic initiatives in our neighbourhoods include playground groups, neigh-
bourhood ‘elders’ (buurtvaders), community enterprises and meeting platforms. What they
have in common is that they are a response to social needs in their immediate setting.
Many initiatives are focused on a variety of activities and are therefore more ‘neighbour-
hood-driven’ than ‘issue-driven’, as we often see today with care or energy cooperatives,
for example. In addition to the primary returns generated by the activities of self-organis-
ing residents, there are also side-effects; such initiatives often lead to more cohesion and
mutual contacts within a neighbourhood.
Continuity of initiatives is not automatic. Key words in the search for ways of belonging
initiatives are ‘demand-led’ and ‘facilitating’. Civil servants and professionals try to meet
the wishes of initiators and to support them without taking over. At the same time, the
policy prescribes that the support given should as far as possible be non-financial, though
obtaining grants is seen by some initiators as a form of recognition and incentive. This
