summary
applies more generally for open appreciation from politicians and administrators, includ-
ing where residents have organised activities with a high degree of independence. Apart
from working with local authorities, initiators also collaborate – and sometimes compete
– with all kinds of other parties: police, schools, housing associations, welfare organisa-
tions and other residents’ initiatives.
Seeking volunteers
Local authorities made extra efforts in the 40-neighbourhoods period to stimulate new
resident initiatives. Grants were frequently made available and attention was sometimes
drawn to existing initiatives. As well as organised initiatives, there are lots of other ways in
which residents work for their neighbourhood: keeping the streets clean, volunteering in
the community centre or looking after a neighbourhood square together. As with society
as a whole, it is difficult to find permanent volunteers in these neighbourhoods too, for
example due to lack of time, poor health, lack of self-confidence or personal worries
which soak up energy.
We regularly encountered forms of activation. First, a great deal of effort is directed
towards children and young people. There is an impression among professionals that the
present generation of young people are more active and more responsible than previous
generations. On the other hand, it is sometimes said that it is difficult to keep children
motivated for much more than six months. The involvement of children and young peo-
ple is appealing and also brings in the parents. Thereafter, it is key to motivate others as
well. Second, activation is also accompanied by ownership of a part of the public space.
We saw that this can work very well (e.g. the Wibautplein in Nieuwland), but also that it
benefits from close monitoring. Third, we saw many attempts to install individuals in key
positions in the neighbourhood because they act as gatekeepers to a network. Good expe-
riences have been gained here, too. The resident then functions as a link who raises the
issues that concern their ‘rank and file’. Professionals can see from the turnout to planned
meetings whether the key person has judged this correctly. We also heard that word-of-
mouth is the most productive way of recruiting volunteers.
Consultative platforms
In contrast to ‘do initiatives’, consultative platforms are more likely to be dominated by
white, older men and women. Some successful attempts have been made to make these
platforms more representative, for example by bringing in key figures from ethnic minor-
ity groups. This also applies for new concepts such as the G1000 consultation platform in
Kruiskamp, where lots are drawn to decide who can attend a given meeting in order to
talk about issues affecting the neighbourhood with other residents and with professio-
nals. This form of consultation is found to be motivating and to raise turnout. Also inter-
esting is that there are always a number of new faces around the table. That said, the rep-
resentativeness is not yet all it could be.
