betrokken wijken
5 Which experiences offer lessons for the decentralisations in the social domain?
Professionals in the neighbourhoods look back with nostalgia at the ‘Achter-de-voordeur’
programmes, which involved visits to the homes of individual families. The programmes
no longer exist in their old form due to budgetary constraints. The neighbourhood teams
have not yet reached the stage of making home visits, and there are doubts in Nieuwland
and Kruiskamp whether they will ever do so. Stakeholders also wonder to what extent the
old programmes reached the right people, since by no means everyone is prepared to
open their door. It is also not obvious in advance which are and are not the best streets to
visit, there were uncertainties about how frequent the visits should be, and the referrals
process did not always go smoothly. However, the preventive nature of the approach was
universally praised and is now missed. The approach was also used to persuade residents
to become volunteers. Residents that we spoke to and who had been approached take a
more critical view, seeing it to some degree as nannying and interference and leaving
them with the feeling of, ‘If I need something, I will come and ask for it’.
This last point is the way it now is, with residents able to visit the neighbourhood teams.
Section S.2.3 reported on the additional demand that the local embedding of help and
support services is generating and of the difficulties facing those services. De 40-neigh-
bourhoods policy inspired local stakeholders to an integrated approach. An important
goal in this approach was to avoid pushing citizens from pillar to post. This can be effi-
cient to avoid duplication. This requires smoothly collaborating partners in a sufficiently
staffed team. Two years of experience in Nieuwland show that the team is not yet satisfac-
tory coping with the increased demand for assistance. This bears the risk of sending peo-
ple from pillar to post as yet.
6 What insights do the interviews in the neighbourhoods offer for predominantly statistical research on
the effects of neighbourhood improvement?
Section S.2.1 reflected on the relationship between the findings of the study ‘Working on
the Neighbourhood’ (Werk aan de Wijk) (Permentier et al. 2013) and our study. Briefly, the
earlier study found no added value from the 40-neighbourhoods policy in terms of live-
ability and safety compared with the policy in other deprived neighbourhoods. We believe
this is because the biggest contributions to those improvements were applied more
broadly than in just the 40 neighbourhoods, and that this was also happening before the
initiative was launched. After 2007, efforts were directed towards achieving further
improvements with the input of residents, but the aspirations grew along with the
improvements. This also means that a one-off catch-up is not enough and that neigh-
bourhoods need to be properly maintained.
The stories behind the figures also help us to put the results of the Urban40 study (Stronks
et al. 2014) of health effects into perspective. Notable effects on health were found for the
40-neighbourhoods policy, especially in neighbourhoods where there had been high pol-
icy input. Some of the interventions related to health, for example sport in the neigh-
244
