summary
bourhood, information on diet and medicines, and allotments. But interventions not
focused directly on health can also help reduce stress. During activities and events aimed
at promoting meeting others, those who share similar problems can get things off their
chest and people are removed from their isolation.
In this study we found a plausible explanation for the increase in mental health care
found in Urban40. As experiences in the neighbourhood support team in Nieuwland
showed, but also in other locations such as schools, supply creates demand. When people
feel there is no barrier to talking about their problems, this leads to more requests for
help. Within the discourse of the 40-neighbourhoods policy this was seen as a good thing,
because social policy had been deployed for a long period. In combination with more
recent severe spending cuts in the care sector, however, growing demand will change into
a matter for concern: will the support teams still be able to provide the requested sup-
port?
Bijlmer K-neighbourhood
The K-neighbourhood in the Bijlmer district of Amsterdam, so called because all the street names
begin with’ K’, no longer resembles the high-rise neighbourhood that it once was, with its many
empty flats, decay and drugs crime. Cars no longer race around on the elevated avenues that criss-
cross the district; several flats have been replaced by houses. The last batch of ‘honeycomb’ flats is
being renovated and turned into a museum, the ‘Bijlmermuseum’. Illustrative of the definitive turn-
around in the fortunes of the neighbourhood is the fact that the ‘Kleiburg’ block of flats, which was
scheduled for demolition, sold well as flats for renovation. The K-zone sports park is located beneath
the Metro viaduct, the result of a civic initiative in the 1990s. Not far from the racetrack, ‘the tree that
saw everything’ recalls the El Al aircraft which ploughed into the ‘Kruitberg’ and ‘Groeneveen’ blocks
of flats in 1992. That was also the year when the renovation of the Bijlmer began.
Even before the 40-neighbourhoods approach, the ‘Kansrijk Zuidoost’ project was launched in
Bijlmer, a large-scale initiative intended to bring out the potential of this part of Amsterdam and
which went on to serve as an example for other urban districts. It helped to shed light on the prob-
lems of the district and to refer people with problems to appropriate help. Recently it was compro-
mised for privateering successful initiatives from residents. The ‘neighbourhood ambassadors’ also
appealed to people’s imagination; the district council and welfare organisation nominated active
neighbourhood residents as ‘ambassadors’, who gave civil servants and professionals access to the
many networks in their neighbourhood, including among Surinamese, Antilleans, Ghanaians and
other residents from ethnic minorities. There are large groups of people without papers living in the
district, who can in practice only be reached through the many migrant churches or radio stations.
After the physical renovations and removal of the drug scene from the streets, the charms of the dis-
trict are more evident, such as the many green spaces and the congenial atmosphere among the col-
ourful residents. Despite being aware of many image problems, many residents are proud of their
neighbourhood and it is not uncommon for people who had left to return. Several professionals we
spoke to also live there.
