betrokken wijken
Nieuwland
The Nieuwland district, close to the picturesque centre of Schiedam, is portrayed in a logo as a patch-
work of neighbourhoods each with their own identity. This was the outcome of a branding exercise
in the early 2000s and marked the start of a major offensive against vacancy, criminality and decay.
Although there are still critical voices from residents of some old flats, many are satisfied and
attached to their neighbourhood. There are also many active residents.
Consensus on the importance of a more varied housing stock was achieved relatively late in the
‘cheap’ Schiedam, so that the ultimate new-build plans for Nieuwland could not all be realised
before the onset of the economic crisis. In some locations, building sites lay open for years.
One striking achievement of the renewal is the Nolenslaan shopping street, which was successfully
renovated, whereas many shops in the centre of Schiedam are standing empty. Through good coop-
eration with local businesses, property owners, the shopping street manager and the local authority,
an attractive and safe retail avenue has been created, with varied shops and business operators who
live alongside their customers and sometimes organise social events for them. Another ‘pearl’ is
Wibautplein, a temporarily configured square containing a natural garden, a pavilion and an allot-
ment which is used to grow food for the food bank. Local residents manage all of this and organise
activities in the pavilion, which thus provides a replacement for a closed community centre.
Poverty rates in Nieuwland were above the average in the priority neighbourhoods in 2007. Schie-
dam receives an influx of people from Rotterdam seeking housing. This creates concerns for the local
authority, partly because of the ‘Rotterdam Act’, which closes off parts of the city for low-income
tenants. A neighbourhood support team has been in place in Nieuwland for two years, where people
can go with problems. This decentralised help and support service has generated lots of extra
demand within the district, and this fuels the concerns about the influx of residents with problems
into the municipality.
Slotervaart
The whole Nieuw-West district on the edge of Amsterdam is a priority neighbourhood. In the Sloter-
vaart part of the district, the 1065 postcode area is situated between the Sloterplas waterway and the
railway line. It is an early post-war neighbourhood that is still virtually in its original condition. There
has been some physical renewal, but the economic crisis brought it to a halt. Does this mean that
things can also improve even without physical renewal? The neighbourhood was already quite varied
when it was first designed, and many single-family homes were accordingly sold. Moreover, the
promise that flats could be renewed or renovated appears to have motivated residents to continue
living in a small home – perhaps logical, given that moving house within Amsterdam is too expen-
sive.
Nieuw-West, including Slotervaart, mainly became known for its problems with youth crime and nui-
sance. Feelings of safety have improved greatly, even though the number of young people has
increased. Criminal groups, especially youngsters, have been removed from the streets as a result of
the ‘Top600’ initiative targeting the 600 perpetrators of high-impact offences. In addition to this
repressive action, the initiative also offers future prospects to young people who are open to them.
More preventive initiatives were also taken by residents in Slotervaart, with financial backing from
the district council. The Ara Cora Foundation focuses on providing sports and coaching facilities for
