summary
young people, while the Moroccan Seniors Salon (Ouderensalon) organises emancipatory meetings on
topics such as parenting.
Shopping centre managers were deployed to smarten up the retail zones, including Sierplein.
The post-war neighbourhood development concept dictated that there also had to be local shops,
which explains the small retail outlets scattered within the residential blocks. It is difficult to find a
commercial use for these buildings, since retail activities are now mainly concentrated in the shop-
ping centres. Civil-society organisations are clustered in the Huis van de Wijk building in the adjacent
Overtoomse Veld neighbourhood, which falls outside the radius of action of several residents.
Kruiskamp
Kruiskamp was the first post-war district to be built in Amersfoort. It looks like a green area, and
following the large-scale restructuring it contains a very varied built environment, with old and new
flats mixed with houses and a highly diverse architecture. The green character, with lots of play-
grounds, has remained. The Kruiskamp playground association, which has been in existence since
1930, is a sustainable residents’ initiative which is run by a faithful group of volunteers.
There are a number of special features that distinguish Kruiskamp from the other cases. It has for
example been removed from the list of priority neighbourhoods because the objectives set have
been achieved. There has also been a community enterprise for several years: Kruiskamp Onder-
neemt. This is a community initiative in which residents have renovated an old municipal school and
now run it as a meeting and business space. There are studios and workshops, and rooms can also be
hired for parties or recreational activities. Compared with many other community enterprises, the
objectives are modest: the board leaves it to residents to take the initiative to organise meetings.
The centre is intended to offer an alternative to district community centres, but any activities must
be organised by residents themselves.
Another difference is that a new form of resident consultation is being used. The action plans and
neighbourhood consultations have come to an end, but meetings continue using the G1000 method,
in which citizens themselves set the agenda and form a panel to negotiate with the local authorities.
For Kruiskamp, this means in practice that periodic meetings are organised to which 100 local resi-
dents are selected at random and invited to talk about neighbourhood problems and what they
would like to happen in the neighbourhood. Participants are selected by drawing lots, while groups
that are still underrepresented, such as residents of Turkish or Moroccan origin, are recruited in a
supplementary round, for example by the neighbourhood ‘elders’. Experiences with this approach
are positive, with new faces appearing at meetings.
247
