Vergunningverlening, toezicht en handhaving (VTH) door het Openbaar Lichaam Sint Eustatius 
 
 
Summary 
 
Assignment and investigation 
th
On the 4 of October 2022, the State Secretary of Infrastructure and Water 
Management (Infrastructuur en Waterstaat, IenW) requested the Human 
Environment and Transport Inspectorate (Inspectie Leefomgeving en Transport), 
hereinafter ILT, to conduct an investigation into permits, supervision and 
enforcement (VTH) on Bonaire, St. Eustatius and Saba. The State Secretary also 
requested recommendations for improving the system and introducing ‘checks and 
balances’. The investigation was conducted in coordination with the Minister for 
Nature and Nitrogen of the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality 
(Ministerie van Landbouw, Natuur en Voedselkwaliteit) hereinafter LNV.  
 
This report presents the outcome of that investigation and focuses specifically on 
the execution of the VTH tasks relating to construction, the environment and nature 
by the Public Entity St. Eustatius (OLE). The project team formed by ILT and LNV 
visited St. Eustatius twice for the purposes of the investigation. In addition, 
interviews were conducted and documents and reports were studied. OLE 
employees cooperated fully in providing information for the investigation and 
ensured that the project team could interview the desired individuals. 
 
Results 
The ILT concludes that the execution of VTH tasks related to construction, the 
environment and nature on St. Eustatius does not comply with legal requirements 
and local regulations. This conclusion is based on the following observations. 
 
General 
• The Executive Council has adopted the Implementation Programme for 
Supervision and Enforcement (Uitvoeringsprogramma Toezicht en 
Handhaving), however the Policy Document for Supervision and 
Enforcement (Beleidsdocument Toezicht en Handhaving) has not been 
adopted. 
• The separation between permit issue and supervision was achieved by 
assigning these areas of focus to different employees. ‘Checks and balances’ 
such as documented work processes and peer review are lacking. 
• The OLE does not use digital systems for verifiable permit issue and 
implementation of supervision and enforcement. Document registration is 
done uniformly but is incomplete. 
• The OLE does not formally manage execution of the VTH tasks. 
• Permit issue officers and supervisors organise the activities based on mutual 
agreement; an integrated approach to complex cases is lacking. 
 
Permits 
• Building permits are issued according to a draft flow chart. A single nuisance 
permit was issued in 2020, by an externally hired permit issue officer. 
Ecological permits are granted for scientific research. 
• The OLE does not have an up-to-date list of businesses that are currently 
required to have permits and must have an environmental permit after the 
BES Establishment and Activities Decree (Inrichtingen- en Activiteitenbesluit 
BES), hereinafter IAB BES, comes into effect. 
 
 
  
Pagina 9 van 49
