Vergunningverlening, toezicht en handhaving (VTH) door het Openbaar Lichaam Sint Eustatius 
 
 
 
Example 
When the Golden Rock Resort was built, building permits were issued for each phase 
of construction. Ecological permits should also have been applied for and issued for 
several activities. This did not happen. 
 
Supervision 
• There is no inspector to monitor compliance with nuisance permits.  
• There is 1 building inspector who supervises building permits 2 days a week.  
• There is no inspector to monitor compliance with ecological permits. 
 
Example: 
According to the OLE, one of the operators employed by the waste processing plant 
also monitors compliance with the requirements of the nuisance permit. The 
operator reports that supervision should be performed by the VTH unit. In practice, 
the VTH unit and operator do not monitor compliance with permit requirements. 
 
Enforcement 
• Infringements that have been observed continue, the OLE does not act to 
enforce the law and regulations. 
 
Underlying causes 
The OLE faces several bottlenecks that prevent adequate execution of VTH. The ILT 
has identified a number of causes in this regard. 
 
Staff and organisation 
• The VTH unit has not had a manager for an extended period of time, so this 
unit operates without management control. Employees do not work to an 
established schedule and respond only to requests, reports or complaints. 
• All preliminary decisions that are submitted to the government must be 
accompanied by an opinion from the Legal Affairs Department. This 
department consists of 1 employee, resulting in high working pressure and 
backlogs.  
 
Resources and processes 
• The VTH unit does not have any supporting digital systems for VTH and 
registering and archiving documents. There is a corresponding lack of 
transparency and overview as a result. 
 
Culture and managerial influence 
• Employees in the VTH unit do not feel that they have the government’s 
support in performing their supervision and enforcement tasks. As a result, 
they adopt a cautious approach to supervision and enforcement. 
 
Involvement of the Dutch government 
• The Dutch government intervened in 2018, temporarily removing the local 
governing council from office. Despite this intervention, the OLE does not 
adequately perform the VTH tasks relating to construction, the environment 
and nature. 
• The date of entry into force of the IAB BES has been postponed repeatedly. 
This has led to a wait-and-see attitude on the part of business owners and 
the OLE regarding applications for and the issue of nuisance permits. The 
OLE has explicitly stated that it will wait for the IAB BES to come into force 
and not issue nuisance permits until then. 
 
  
Pagina 10 van 49
