Vergunningverlening, toezicht en handhaving (VTH) door het Openbaar Lichaam Sint Eustatius 
 
 
Conclusion 
The OLE’s execution of the VTH tasks is not in order. In addition, checks and 
balances are lacking within the organisation. The interests that laws relating to 
construction, the environment and nature are intended to protect are either not 
being protected at all, or not being protected adequately. Due to many, sometimes 
strongly interdependent causes, a fundamental change in the execution of VTH 
tasks is needed in order to improve the situation. 
 
Recommendations 
The ILT recommends the following action to improve execution of the VTH tasks 
relating to construction, the environment and nature. 
 
Recommendation 1 (Dutch government) 
Rapidly transfer the execution of the entire VTH task package relating to 
construction, the environment and nature to a single existing environment agency in 
the Netherlands in Europe. This ensures retention of knowledge and experience, and 
guarantees continuity, while at the same time distancing the activities from the 
goverment. 
• In line with the situation in the Netherlands in Europe, the public entity 
retains its powers and continues to have final responsibility, but the tasks 
are executed by the environment agency. The public entity gives the 
director of this environment agency a mandate to sign permits and 
enforcement orders. 
• Immediately start to identify and eliminate permit issue backlogs within the 
OLE, under the management and with the support of the environment 
agency. In doing so, ensure timely involvement of the local nature 
management organisation and consultants in the VTH process. 
• Due to the significant physical distance to St. Eustatius, special attention is 
needed for the practical aspects of executing the VTH tasks. This can be 
achieved by closely involving the current OLE permit issue officers and 
supervisors in the environment agency's execution of the tasks.  
 
Recommendation 2 (OLE) 
Address the identified bottlenecks within the administrative organisation of the OLE 
quickly and in a focused manner, in close cooperation with the environment agency. 
Part of the VTH process will continue to be executed by the OLE despite 
recommendation 1. 
• Staff and organisation: Prioritise the recruitment of a VTH unit manager. 
• Management: Set priorities on an annual basis. Link these priorities to a 
concrete schedule of work. Perform the work and monitor progress. 
• Use of ICT: Make an unequivocal choice for support systems. Arrange 
training for the employees and focus management attention on consistent 
use of these systems. 
 
Recommendation 3 (Dutch government and OLE) 
In close coordination with the OLE, ensure up-to-date and adequate laws and 
regulations for construction, the environment and nature.  
• Specifically for construction: Use the BES code to implement the functional 
requirements of the Buildings Decree (OLE) and anchor this code by means 
of a Ministerial Decree (Dutch government). 
• Specifically for the environment: Ensure rapid entry into force of the IAB 
BES to regulate the businesses with the greatest potential environmental 
impact.  
  
Pagina 11 van 49
