Minderjarigen 
CRC Het Comité adviseert de Verdragsstaat (a) volledige implementatie te VenJ 
78 waarborgen van de standaarden van het jeugdstrafrecht, vooral de artikelen 
37, 40 en 39 van het Verdrag, alsmede de Richtlijnen van de Verenigde Naties 
inzake de minimumnormen voor de rechtsbedeling ten behoeve van 
minderjarigen (de Regels van Beijing) en de Richtlijnen van de Verenigde 
Naties inzake misdaadpreventie onder minderjarigen (de Richtlijnen van 
Riyad), in het licht van algemene aanbeveling nr. 10 (2007) inzake de rechten 
van kinderen binnen het jeugdstrafrecht; (b) te overwegen zijn wetgeving te 
herzien zodat kinderen niet langer als volwassenen kunnen worden berecht; 
(c) de veroordeling van kinderen tot levenslange gevangenisstraf uit te 
bannen; (d) te waarborgen dat vrijheidsbeneming van jeugdige daders alleen 
in het uiterste geval wordt toegepast, en in dat geval voor een zo kort 
mogelijke periode. 
 
Comm The Commissioner calls on the Dutch authorities to increase the current VenJ 
156 minimum age of criminal responsibility fully in line with the UN Committee of 
the Rights of the Child’s position, according to which a higher minimum age of 
criminal responsibility, for instance 14 or 16 years of age, contributes to a 
juvenile justice system in line with the UN CRC standards. 
 
ESH The Committee concludes that the situation in the Netherlands is not in VenJ 
17.1 conformity with Article 17§1 of the Charter on the grounds that: 
- prison sentences for minors may be up to 30 years; 
- young offenders may be held in adult detention facilities; 
- unlawfully present children are not provided with shelter for as long as they 
are in the jurisdiction of the Netherlands. 
UPR In de strafrechtwetgeving de toepassing van levenslange gevangenisstraffen VenJ 
98.20 voor kinderen afschaffen (Wit-Rusland). 
 
Comm In full line with the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child’s position,  the VenJ 
157 Commissioner recommends that the Netherlands take all necessary measures 
to withdraw its reservation to Article 37 of the UN CRC and with a view to 
achieving a non-discriminatory full application of their juvenile justice rules to 
all persons under the age of 18 years. As concerns more particularly the fact 
that in exceptional cases children can be placed in adult detention facilities, 
the Commissioner wishes to recall that international standards make it clear 
that children in detention must be accommodated separately from adults. 
 
Comm The Commissioner calls on the Dutch authorities to ensure that, in accordance VenJ 
158 with Article 37 (b-d) of the UN CRC, the arrest, detention or imprisonment of 
a child is used only as a measure of last resort in the Netherlands. It is 
particularly important that alternatives to pre-trial custodial settings are made 
more accessible to ensure that they are fully used in practice. The 
Commissioner also calls on the Dutch authorities to ensure that pre-trial 
detention of children is not used beyond the shortest period of time possible. 
To this end, he strongly encourages the Dutch authorities to consider reducing 
the current legal maximum duration of police custody of juveniles. 
 
18
