Comm More generally, the Commissioner considers that there is a need to ensure VenJ 
159 that police custody of juveniles better complies with child-friendly justice as 
laid down in international legal standards and spelled out in the 
abovementioned Committee of Ministers Guidelines on child friendly justice. 
The Commissioner underlines that the obligation to separate every child 
deprived of liberty from adults, unless it is considered in the child’s best 
interests not to do so, also applies to police custody. Every child deprived of 
his or her liberty should have the possibility to exercise his/her right to 
prompt access to legal and other appropriate assistance. 
 
UPR Alternatieve oplossingen zoeken voor vrijheidsberoving van minderjarigen en VenJ 
98.84 in het bijzonder het voorkomen van hechtenis voorafgaand aan het proces bij 
minderjarigen die op het oordeel van de rechter wachten (Frankrijk). 
 
  
Mensenhandel en gedwongen verdwijningen 
CED The Committee encourages the State party to ensure that persons suspected VenJ 
19 of having committed an offence of enforced disappearance are not in a 
position to influence investigations by directly or indirectly obstructing them. 
For this reason, it recommends that the State party adopt an explicit legal 
provision providing for the suspension from duties of officials suspected of 
having committed an enforced disappearance. The Committee further 
recommends that the State party take the necessary measures to ensure that 
all cases of enforced disappearances are only investigated and tried by the 
competent civil authorities. 
 
CED The Committee recommends that the State party adopt the necessary steps VenJ 
21 to ensure that the existing protection measures are effectively applied with 
regard to all persons referred to in article 12, paragraph 1, of the 
1
Convention. 
 
CED The Committee recommends that the State party include an explicit provision VenJ 
33 for the right of victims to know the truth regarding the circumstances of an 
enforced disappearance and the fate of the disappeared person. The 
Committee calls on the State party to adopt the necessary legislative or other 
measures to recognize explicitly the right of persons who have suffered harm 
as the direct result of an enforced disappearance, which occurred in any part 
of the territory, to obtain prompt, fair and adequate compensation and all the 
other forms of reparation, without the need to prove the death of the 
disappeared person, in accordance with article 24, paragraphs 4 and 5, of the 
Convention. 
 
CED The Committee invites the State party to consider reviewing its legislation, VenJ 
35 with a view to incorporating a declaration of absence as a result of enforced 
disappearance, in order to adequately address the legal situation of 
disappeared persons and that of their relatives in areas such as social welfare, 
financial matters, family law and property rights. 
 
                                                           
1
 Art. 12 lid 1 CED: Each State Party shall ensure that any individual who alleges that a person has been 
subjected to enforced disappearance has the right to report the facts to the competent authorities, which shall 
examine the allegation promptly and impartially and, where necessary, undertake without delay a thorough and 
impartial investigation. Appropriate steps shall be taken, where necessary, to ensure that the complainant, 
witnesses, relatives of the disappeared person and their defence counsel, as well as persons participating in the 
investigation, are protected against all ill-treatment or intimidation as a consequence of the complaint or any 
evidence given. 
19
