Decentralisaties en mensenrechten 
 Aanbeveling Min. 
Comm The Commissioner stresses that the Dutch authorities, when decentralising a BZK 
68 sector with important human rights responsibilities, should always accompany 
the process by making sure that the local authorities are properly trained in 
human rights and have sufficient financial and human resources to accomplish 
their new tasks, in full line with the Recommendation CM/Rec(2011)11 of the 
Committee of Ministers to member states on the funding by higher-level 
authorities of new competencies for local authorities. The Dutch authorities 
should provide the necessary guidance and co-ordination on provisions of 
services to ensure respect of international human rights standards on the 
ground and avoid disparities in the protection of rights across regions and 
municipalities. They should also organise a central monitoring of the quality of 
these services on the basis of human rights standards. The Commissioner 
stresses that the authorities have the duty to protect human rights at stake 
when they take action to implement existing policies and devise new policies. 
More generally, he invites the Dutch authorities to adopt more systematically 
a human rights-based approach to their policies at the national and local 
levels. 
 
Comm Noting that the municipalities will have full responsibility in implementing VWS/
179 measures to prevent and remedy child abuse as of 1 January 2015, the BZK/
Commissioner stresses that the Netherlands has the duty to ensure full VenJ 
compliance with its international obligations in the field of protecting children 
from abuse. Therefore the national authorities should monitor, with the 
assistance of independent institutions such as the Children’s Ombudsman and 
the National Rapporteur on Sexual Violence against Children, the work of the 
municipalities in this field and take all necessary measures to ensure that the 
decentralisation does not impact negatively on the right of children not to be 
victims of abuse. The Commissioner also draws attention to the “Pact of 
Towns and Regions to Stop Sexual Violence against Children” devised by the 
Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe to guide 
authorities in their fight against sexual exploitation and abuse. It provides a 
list of practical initiatives and policies to be implemented at local and regional 
levels in order to develop child-friendly services, protect children and help 
prevent sexual violence within the community. 
 
 
Recente kamerbrieven bij “Decentralisaties en mensenrechten” 
 Kamerstukken II 2014/15, 33 826, nr. 8. (Decentralisatie en scholing i.r.t. het Nationaal 
Actieplan Mensenrechten.) 
 Kamerstukken II 2014/15, 31 015, nr. 113. (Kindermishandeling, coördinatie Europese 
campagne kindersekstoerisme “Don’t Look Away” voor de jaren 2016-2017) 
  
25
