GRETA 1 GRETA invites the Dutch authorities to: VenJ 
- continue and further strengthen their efforts against human trafficking for 
the purpose of labour exploitation, including by doing more to raise 
awareness of this type of trafficking among professionals (such as 
policemen, prosecutors, judges, labour inspectors, municipalities and trade 
unions), in high risk sectors (e.g. agriculture, horticultural, catering, dock 
work, meat processing and construction), as well as among the public at 
large; 
- further restrict employment contracts with benefits in kind and tighten 
regulations on employment agencies. 
GRETA 3 GRETA welcomes the efforts made in the Netherlands to train different VenJ 
professionals on issues related to human trafficking and invites the Dutch 
authorities to maintain their efforts, in particular concerning the training of 
judges, labour inspectors and local actors. Future training programmes 
should be designed with a view to improving the knowledge and skills of 
relevant professionals which enable them to identify victims of trafficking, to 
assist and protect them, to facilitate compensation for victims and to secure 
convictions of traffickers.  
GRETA 7 GRETA welcomes the considerable efforts made in the Netherlands in the VenJ 
area of awareness raising as a form of prevention of [Trafficking in Human 
Beings] and invites the Dutch authorities to plan future actions in the light of 
the assessment of the impact of previous awareness-raising measures. 
GRETA GRETA considers that the Dutch authorities should ensure that victims of VenJ 
17 trafficking can fully benefit in practice from the right provided under Dutch 
law to obtain a renewable residence permit when they are unable to co-
operate with the authorities and to raise awareness of this possibility among 
relevant professionals and victims.  
GRETA GRETA invites the Dutch authorities to consider making clearer the VenJ 
18 criminalisation of the use of services of a victim of [Trafficking in Human 
Beings] with the knowledge that the person is a victim of [Trafficking in 
Human Beings]. 
GRETA VenJ 
Furthermore, GRETA invites the Dutch authorities to: 
22 
- further support the specialisation of judges on human trafficking in order to 
continue securing high rates of convictions and sentences proportionate to 
the seriousness of the crime (see paragraph 67); 
- make further use of the existing framework to seize and confiscate criminal 
assets in the framework of trafficking investigations at the earliest stages 
possible. 
 
Recente kamerbrieven bij “Kennis en bewustwording” 
 Kamerstukken II 2014/15, 30 950, nr. 76 en bijlagen. (Voortgangsbrief discriminatie.) 
 
 
  
34
