Comm The Commissioner calls on the Dutch authorities to increase the current VenJ 
156 minimum age of criminal responsibility fully in line with the UN Committee of 
the Rights of the Child’s position, according to which a higher minimum age of 
criminal responsibility, for instance 14 or 16 years of age, contributes to a 
juvenile justice system in line with the UN CRC standards. 
 
ESH The Committee concludes that the situation in the Netherlands is not in VenJ 
17.1 conformity with Article 17§1 of the Charter on the grounds that: 
- prison sentences for minors may be up to 30 years; 
- young offenders may be held in adult detention facilities; 
- unlawfully present children are not provided with shelter for as long as they 
are in the jurisdiction of the Netherlands. 
UPR In de strafrechtwetgeving de toepassing van levenslange gevangenisstraffen VenJ 
98.20 voor kinderen afschaffen (Wit-Rusland). 
 
Comm In full line with the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child’s position,  the VenJ 
157 Commissioner recommends that the Netherlands take all necessary measures 
to withdraw its reservation to Article 37 of the UN CRC and with a view to 
achieving a non-discriminatory full application of their juvenile justice rules to 
all persons under the age of 18 years. As concerns more particularly the fact 
that in exceptional cases children can be placed in adult detention facilities, 
the Commissioner wishes to recall that international standards make it clear 
that children in detention must be accommodated separately from adults. 
 
Comm The Commissioner calls on the Dutch authorities to ensure that, in accordance VenJ 
158 with Article 37 (b-d) of the UN CRC, the arrest, detention or imprisonment of 
a child is used only as a measure of last resort in the Netherlands. It is 
particularly important that alternatives to pre-trial custodial settings are made 
more accessible to ensure that they are fully used in practice. The 
Commissioner also calls on the Dutch authorities to ensure that pre-trial 
detention of children is not used beyond the shortest period of time possible. 
To this end, he strongly encourages the Dutch authorities to consider reducing 
the current legal maximum duration of police custody of juveniles. 
 
Comm More generally, the Commissioner considers that there is a need to ensure VenJ 
159 that police custody of juveniles better complies with child-friendly justice as 
laid down in international legal standards and spelled out in the 
abovementioned Committee of Ministers Guidelines on child friendly justice. 
The Commissioner underlines that the obligation to separate every child 
deprived of liberty from adults, unless it is considered in the child’s best 
interests not to do so, also applies to police custody. Every child deprived of 
his or her liberty should have the possibility to exercise his/her right to 
prompt access to legal and other appropriate assistance. 
 
UPR Alternatieve oplossingen zoeken voor vrijheidsberoving van minderjarigen en VenJ 
98.84 in het bijzonder het voorkomen van hechtenis voorafgaand aan het proces bij 
minderjarigen die op het oordeel van de rechter wachten (Frankrijk). 
 
  
Minderjarige vreemdelingen 
CRC Het Comité adviseert de Verdragsstaat het recht op onderwijs van alle VenJ/
62b kinderen te waarborgen door inschrijving van kinderen zonder of met OCW 
onvolledige verblijfspapieren te vergemakkelijken. 
 
57
