Comm The Commissioner welcomes the steps taken by the government to grant VenJ 
127 residence permits to some of the immigrants who cannot be returned through 
the “no-fault” procedure and to child asylum seekers whose applications were 
rejected but who have been living in the country for a certain period of time. 
However, he notes that the conditions applying to these two schemes are very 
restrictive and invites the Dutch authorities to review these conditions. As 
concerns the “no-fault” residence permit, the Dutch authorities should in 
particular consider granting a residence permit if the country of return does 
not respond to a request for travel documents within a reasonable period. 
 
Comm As concerns the Children’s Pardon, the Commissioner calls on the Dutch VenJ 
128 authorities to apply the procedure in a more inclusive way. In particular, the 
current interpretation according to which children who were fully integrated in 
society but not “under the supervision of the central government” are 
excluded from the pardon scheme should be reconsidered. More generally, the 
Commissioner urges the Dutch authorities to ensure full respect of the right of 
children of families of irregular immigrants to have their best interests treated 
as a primary consideration in all decisions pertaining to residence permits or 
return and affecting them, including as members of their families, as required 
by Article 3 of the UN CRC. 
 
  
Kindermishandeling/Seksuele uitbuiting van kinderen 
BuPo De Verdragsstaat dient zijn inspanningen ter bestrijding van VWS/
17 kindermishandeling te intensiveren door de mechanismes voor vroegtijdige VenJ 
ontdekking te verbeteren, door melding van feitelijk misbruik en verdenkingen 
daarvan aan te moedigen en door van overheidsinstanties te verlangen dat zij 
gerechtelijke stappen nemen tegen betrokkenen bij kindermishandeling. 
 
Comm While welcoming all of the measures already taken to combat child abuse in VWS/
177 all its forms, the Commissioner invites the Dutch authorities to ensure a VenJ 
proactive implementation of the existing action plans, protocols and reporting 
codes against child abuse. Particular emphasis should be put on making 
parenting support fully available for all parents who need it, ensuring the 
same quality of care in each municipality and training all relevant 
professionals on detecting and assisting child victims of abuse. The Dutch 
authorities should improve access to services for recovery, counselling and 
other forms of reintegration of victims, with special emphasis on adequate 
funding of these services. The Commissioner encourages the Dutch authorities 
to pursue their efforts in involving civil society and children in devising all of 
their policies against child abuse. 
60
