CESCR The Committee urges the State party to combat poverty and social exclusion SZW 
24 by targeting disadvantaged and marginalized groups, such as single parent 
families, migrants and children, and reiterates its recommendation calling on 
the State party to: a) establish, for each constituent country, an official 
poverty line which would enable the State party to assess the extent of 
poverty and monitor and evaluate progress; and b) draw up and implement 
anti-poverty strategies and action plans, taking full account of economic, 
social and cultural rights. In this regard, the Committee refers the State party 
to its statement on “Poverty and the International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights” (2001). 
 
Comm The Commissioner is concerned at the negative impact of growing child SZW/
165 poverty on the enjoyment of children’s rights in the Netherlands. He stresses VWS 
that in times of economic crisis, the Dutch government has the duty to protect 
the most vulnerable from a reduction in the enjoyment of their human rights, 
in particular social and economic rights. Children at risk of poverty should not 
be further negatively impacted by budget cuts taken by the government in 
response to the economic crisis. The Commissioner recommends that, in 
response to the increasing poverty of children and in order to avoid regression 
on standards achieved, any envisaged budget cuts should be carefully 
assessed for their impact on the particularly vulnerable group constituted by 
children at risk of poverty and social exclusion. 
 
Comm The Commissioner also invites the Dutch authorities to implement the BZK/
166 recommendations made by the Children’s Ombudsman who asked SZW 
municipalities to develop an integrated anti-poverty policy specifically geared 
to children and inform actively the families concerned about existing 
assistance measures. The Commissioner underlines that policies aimed at 
combating poverty should not only target persons living on social benefits but 
also the working poor, including those who are selfemployed, and their 
children. The central government should monitor municipal anti-poverty 
policies with a view to ensuring that no child is left outside the scope of these 
measures and that they are effective. 
 
  
Arbeid 
ESH The Committee concludes that the situation in the Netherlands is not in SZW 
4.1 conformity with Article 4§1 of the Charter on the grounds that: 
 
- It has not been established that the statutory minimum wage ensures a 
decent standard of living; 
- The reduced rates of the statutory minimum wages applicable to young 
workers are manifestly unfair. 
ESH The Committee concludes that the situation in the Netherlands is not in SZW/
7.3 conformity with Article 7§3 of the Charter on the grounds that: OCW 
- children aged 15, still subject to compulsory education, are not guaranteed 
the benefit of an uninterrupted rest period of at least two weeks during 
summer holidays; 
- it is possible for children aged 15, still subject to compulsory education, to 
deliver newspapers before school from 6 a.m. for up to 2 hours per day, 5 
days per week. 
 
65
