Comm The Commissioner strongly recommends that additional safeguards be BZK 
72 included in the current legislation on intelligence and security services’ 
activities in light of the above-mentioned human rights principles. In 
particular, the Dutch authorities should ensure that specific rules on 
metadata processing are added and that specific storage periods for raw 
data are set. The Commissioner also stresses the need for the Dutch 
authorities to take the utmost care, when co-operating with foreign 
intelligence and security services, to ensure that the human rights standards 
of personal data protection are respected. 
 
Comm The Commissioner invites the Dutch authorities to reinforce the legal BZK 
73 framework for the supervision of the intelligence and security activities, 
including the use of all the new surveillance technologies available, notably 
by considering strengthening the role of the CTIVD and the authority of its 
decisions on the lawfulness of the activities supervised. While the procedure 
of notification to subjects of personal data collection has recently been 
criticised for being cumbersome and time-consuming for those who have to 
apply it, the Commissioner considers that it also plays the role of safeguard 
and should therefore be maintained. 
 
 
Recente kamerbrieven bij “Privacy” 
 Kamerstukken II 2014/15, 33 542, nr. 16. (Reactie van het kabinet naar aanleiding van de 
ongeldigverklaring van de richtlijn dataretentie.) 
 Kamerstukken II 2013/14, 33 989, nrs. 1-3. (Verklaring dat er grond bestaat een voorstel 
in overweging te nemen tot verandering in de Grondwet van de bepaling inzake de 
onschendbaarheid van het brief-, telefoon- en telegraafgeheim.) 
 Kamerstukken II 2013/14, 33 820, nr. 2. (Evaluatie Wet op de inlichtingen- en 
veiligheidsdiensten 2002 (rapport Commissie-Dessens).  
 Kamerstukken II 2014/15, 33 820, nr. 4. (Kabinetsreactie over het advies van commissie 
evaluatie Wiv 2002 (Commissie-Dessens) inzake bijzondere bevoegdheden in de digitale 
wereld.)   
75
