Comm As concerns the Children’s Pardon, the Commissioner calls on the Dutch VenJ 
128 authorities to apply the procedure in a more inclusive way. In particular, the 
current interpretation according to which children who were fully integrated 
in society but not “under the supervision of the central government” are 
excluded from the pardon scheme should be reconsidered. More generally, 
the Commissioner urges the Dutch authorities to ensure full respect of the 
right of children of families of irregular immigrants to have their best 
interests treated as a primary consideration in all decisions pertaining to 
residence permits or return and affecting them, including as members of 
their families, as required by Article 3 of the UN CRC. 
 
  
Terugkeer 
CAT 18 Het Comité verzoekt de Verdragsstaat dringend uitsluitend beperkingen te VenJ 
gebruiken bij gedwongen terugkeer in overeenstemming met het 
evenredigheidsbeginsel, en om incidenten van buitensporig gebruik van 
beperkingen en geweld bij gedwongen terugkeer te onderzoeken. 
UPR Onderzoeken uitvoeren naar meldingen en informatie over wrede VenJ 
98.118 behandelingen tijdens het uitzetten van vreemdelingen uit Nederland en 
zorgen voor transparantie bij het onderzoeken van dergelijke meldingen 
(Oezbekistan). 
CPT 78 The CPT recommends to take the necessary steps to ensure that persons VenJ 
deprived of their liberty are only searched by staff of the same sex and that 
any search which requires an inmate to undress is conducted out of the sight 
of custodial staff of the opposite sex. 
 
CPT 80 The CPT recommends the necessary steps to be taken to ensure that: 1) any VenJ 
foreign national to be deported is given the opportunity to be medically 
examined prior to the removal operation; 2) all foreign nationals who have 
been the subject of an abortive deportation operation undergo a medical 
examination as soon as they are returned to detention. 
 
ECRI De ECRI adviseert de autoriteiten ervoor te zorgen dat een beroep tegen een VenJ 
178 negatief besluit over een asielaanvraag dat wordt ingediend bij een 
rechtbank en de Raad van State automatisch tot opschorting van de 
uitzettingsprocedure leidt. 
Comm The Commissioner is concerned at the protracted legal limbo in which some VenJ 
129 irregular immigrants find themselves, in view of the negative impact of this 
situation on their human rights. He calls on the Dutch authorities to assess 
the situation as regards the practical possibility of returning these persons 
thoroughly and on an individual basis. Where return is impossible or 
particularly difficult, the Dutch authorities should find solutions to authorise 
the relevant person to stay in the Netherlands in conditions which meet their 
basic needs and respect their human rights. Particular attention should be 
given to ensuring the prohibition of inhuman and degrading treatment 
(Article 3 of the ECHR) and the protection of the right to private and family 
life (Article 8 of the ECHR). Immigrants who are not removable should also 
be protected from being arrested and placed in administrative detention. 
 
 
 
82
