CPT 61 The CPT recommends to avoid, as far as possible, detaining families with VenJ 
children. If, in exceptional circumstances, detention cannot be avoided, its 
period should not exceed the maximum duration provided by law i.e. 28 days. 
 
CPT 63 The CPT recommends to review the practice at the Centre of locking up VenJ 
children in their cells, in the light of the remarks in paragraph 63. 
 
ECRI De ECRI adviseert de Nederlandse autoriteiten een wettelijke maximale duur VenJ 
207 voor de administratieve detentie van migranten vast te stellen. 
Comm The Commissioner calls on the Dutch authorities to ensure that detention of VenJ 
100 asylum seekers and immigrants is used as last resort, for the shortest 
possible period of time and only used after first reviewing all other 
alternatives and finding that there is no effective alternative, in accordance 
with the Resolution 1707(2010) of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council 
of Europe. He notes the expressed intention of the Dutch authorities to make 
progress towards using administrative detention, both at the border and 
pending deportation, only as a measure of last resort. 
 
Comm As a first step in this direction, the Dutch authorities should stop the detention VenJ 
101 of all asylum seeker children. The Commissioner reiterates that any decision 
taken in the field of immigration detention concerning a child with or without 
his/her family should be taken in full compliance with the UN CRC and in 
particular Article 3 under which the best interests of the child shall be a 
primary consideration in all actions. Moreover, asylum seekers and 
immigrants belonging to vulnerable groups should not be kept in 
administrative detention according to the Commissioner. 
 
Comm The Commissioner invites the Dutch authorities to apply all possible less VenJ 
103 intrusive measures than detention in the period before deportation. The 
Commissioner encourages the authorities to make the requirements for the 
few existing alternatives to detention less stringent and ensure that these 
alternatives can be used for foreigners who are to be returned or removed 
from the country on the basis of an individual assessment. 
 
Comm The Commissioner notes the intention of the Dutch government to merge the VenJ 
104 current detention regimes applicable to border detention and detention 
pending deportation into one single regime. He recalls the principle that 
immigrants should not be treated as criminals and urges the Dutch authorities 
to abandon the current criminal detention regime applicable to detention 
pending deportation and to opt for a nonpunitive regime in all cases of 
administrative detention of foreigners. In particular, the Commissioner urges 
the authorities to reconsider their plans of applying a very restrictive regime 
for the first two weeks of administrative detention, considering that the 
decision to apply such a regime should always be based on an individual 
assessment and be taken only where absolutely necessary. 
 
UPR Alle nodige maatregelen nemen in overeenstemming met de internationale VenJ 
98.106 mensenrechtenwetten ter vermindering van het louter om immigratieredenen 
detineren van personen of omdat ze tot een minderheidsgroep behoren 
(Nicaragua). 
 
85
