Staatloosheid 
 Aanbeveling Min. 
Comm The Commissioner calls upon the Dutch authorities to improve legislation and VenJ 
141 practice relating to the identification and determination of statelessness. In 
particular, he strongly recommends that the Dutch 
authorities establish an accessible and efficient statelessness determination 
procedure by taking due account of UNHCR’s recommendations to the 
Netherlands in this field as well as of recommendations from other institutions 
such as the NIHR and the ACVZ. 
 
Comm The Commissioner stresses that states should recognise the particular VenJ 
142 vulnerability of irregular migrants who are stateless and regularise their 
status. The Commissioner strongly urges the Dutch authorities to take all 
necessary measures to ensure that the human rights of persons who are 
stateless under the UN Convention on Statelessness are fully respected and 
reiterates in this regard the recommendations made above on administrative 
detention and the human rights of irregular migrants. 
 
Comm The situation of children born in the Netherlands who are stateless is of VenJ 
143 particular concern to the Commissioner. In the light of Article 7 of the UN 
CRC, which provides that all children have a right to a nationality, and Article 
1 of the UN 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, which 
requires states parties to grant nationality to a person born on their territory 
who would otherwise be stateless, the Commissioner strongly recommends 
that the Dutch authorities find solutions for stateless children born in the 
Netherlands, notably by rescinding the requirement of lawful stay for their 
acquisition of Dutch nationality. The Commissioner also recalls that in its 
Recommendation on the Nationality of Children, the Committee of Ministers 
stressed that member states should register children as being of unknown 
nationality only for as short a period of time as possible. 
 
ECRI De ECRI adviseert de Nederlandse autoriteiten alle noodzakelijke stappen te VenJ 
173 zetten voor een formeel mechanisme voor het bepalen van staatloosheid en, 
nog belangrijker, voor het voorkomen dat staatloosheid nog langer wordt 
overgedragen op in Nederland geboren kinderen. 
 
Recente kamerbrieven bij “Staatloosheid” 
 Kamerstukken II 2014/15, 19 637, nr. 1917. (Aanvullende reactie van het kabinet op het 
ACVZ-advies inzake staatloostheid.) 
 Kamerstukken II 2014/15, 19 637, nr. 1889. (Beleidsreactie op het UNHCR-rapport inzake 
staatloosheid.) 
 
  
92
