CRC- Het Comité beveelt de Verdragsstaat aan om de capaciteit van de politie te VenJ 
OP 17 versterken voor het ontvangen en onderzoeken van meldingen van seksuele 
uitbuiting, onder andere door het vergroten van de menselijke en financiële 
middelen. 
 
CRC- Het Comité beveelt aan dat de Verdragsstaat nadere maatregelen neemt om VenJ 
OP 25 diens Wetboek van Strafrecht volledig in overeenstemming te brengen met de 
artikelen 2 en 3 van het Facultatief Protocol. Het Comité beveelt in het 
bijzonder aan dat de Verdragsstaat de productie en verspreiding van 
materiaal waarin geadverteerd wordt voor de verkoop van kinderen, 
kinderprostitutie of kinderpornografie strafbaar stelt. 
 
GRETA GRETA invites the Dutch authorities to: VenJ 
1 
- continue and further strengthen their efforts against human trafficking for 
the purpose of labour exploitation, including by doing more to raise awareness 
of this type of trafficking among professionals (such as policemen, 
prosecutors, judges, labour inspectors, municipalities and trade unions), in 
high risk sectors (e.g. agriculture, horticultural, catering, dock work, meat 
processing and construction), as well as among the public at large; 
- further restrict employment contracts with benefits in kind and tighten 
regulations on employment agencies. 
GRETA GRETA considers that the Dutch authorities should continue developing a VenJ 
2 proactive approach taking full account of the particular vulnerability of child 
victims of trafficking, in accordance with the best interests of the child. 
GRETA GRETA welcomes the efforts made in the Netherlands to train different VenJ 
3 professionals on issues related to human trafficking and invites the Dutch 
authorities to maintain their efforts, in particular concerning the training of 
judges, labour inspectors and local actors. Future training programmes should 
be designed with a view to improving the knowledge and skills of relevant 
professionals which enable them to identify victims of trafficking, to assist and 
protect them, to facilitate compensation for victims and to secure convictions 
of traffickers.  
GRETA GRETA invites the Dutch authorities to continue exploring ways of encouraging VenJ 
4 all stakeholders to report presumed victims of [Trafficking in Human Beings] 
to CoMensha in order to have comprehensive statistics on all victims in the 
country, including children, and to secure adequate funding for CoMensha to 
perform this task.  
GRETA GRETA welcomes the research on [Trafficking in Human Beings] carried out in VenJ 
5 the Netherlands and invites the Dutch authorities to continue conducting and 
supporting research on [Trafficking in Human Beings] issues as an important 
source of information for future policy measures.  
GRETA GRETA commends the efforts made in the area of international co-operation VenJ 
6 and invites the Dutch authorities to continue developing international co-
operation with a view to preventing human trafficking, assisting victims of 
trafficking, and investigating and prosecuting human trafficking offences, 
including through exploring further possibilities for co-operation with 
governmental and nongovernmental actors in countries of origin and transit. 
99
