GRETA GRETA also considers that the Dutch authorities should: VenJ 
13 
- review the entry requirements to COSM shelters, in particular the conditions 
excluding victims with an ongoing or past asylum application; 
- ensure that all victims, including EU and Dutch nationals, are provided with 
assistance adapted to their individual needs. 
GRETA Moreover, GRETA considers that the Dutch authorities should ensure that VenJ 
14 placing child victims of “loverboys” in closed shelters should be a measure of 
last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time, and should take 
into account the best interests of the child. 
GRETA GRETA invites the Dutch authorities to keep under review the capacity of the VenJ 
15 different types of shelters available for male victims of trafficking, to 
strengthen links between them and secure an adequate allocation of resources 
for that purpose.  
GRETA GRETA urges the Dutch authorities to ensure, in compliance with the VenJ 
16 obligations under Article 13 of the Convention, that possible victims of 
trafficking are offered a recovery and reflection period and are able to fully 
benefit from all the measures of protection and assistance envisaged in Article 
12, paragraphs 1 and 2, of the Convention during this period.  
GRETA GRETA considers that the Dutch authorities should ensure that victims of VenJ 
17 trafficking can fully benefit in practice from the right provided under Dutch law 
to obtain a renewable residence permit when they are unable to co-operate 
with the authorities and to raise awareness of this possibility among relevant 
professionals and victims.  
GRETA GRETA invites the Dutch authorities to consider making clearer the VenJ 
18 criminalisation of the use of services of a victim of [Trafficking in Human 
Beings] with the knowledge that the person is a victim of [Trafficking in 
Human Beings]. 
GRETA GRETA invites the Dutch authorities to make sure that no victims found in VenJ 
19 possession of false travel documents are punished on this ground. 
GRETA GRETA urges the Dutch authorities to ensure that victims having committed VenJ 
20 an offence under the influence of traffickers are not precluded from obtaining 
a residence permit after the conviction of the perpetrators. 
GRETA GRETA considers that the Dutch authorities should ensure that, in trafficking VenJ 
21 cases where it has been decided not to prosecute, victims are duly informed 
of the possibility of applying for a residence permit on compelling 
humanitarian reasons and that deportation will be suspended while their 
application is examined. 
GRETA Furthermore, GRETA invites the Dutch authorities to: VenJ 
22 
- further support the specialisation of judges on human trafficking in order to 
continue securing high rates of convictions and sentences proportionate to the 
seriousness of the crime (see paragraph 67); 
- make further use of the existing framework to seize and confiscate criminal 
assets in the framework of trafficking investigations at the earliest stages 
possible. 
101
