Gedwongen verdwijningen 
 Aanbeveling Min. 
CED The Committee calls upon the State party to take all the necessary measures VenJ 
13 to ensure the direct applicability and uniform application of the provisions of 
the Convention. 
 
CED The Committee recommends that the State party review the definition of VenJ 
15 enforced disappearance in the International Crimes Act in order to ensure 
that, insofar as it applies to the autonomous crime of enforced disappearance, 
it is fully compliant with article 2 of the Convention. 
 
CED The Committee recommends that the State party revise its legislation, with a VenJ 
17 view to removing the possibility of imposing fines as a stand-alone penalty for 
the offence of enforced disappearance. The State party should also ensure 
that the imposition of the minimum penalty for the crime of enforced 
disappearance takes due account of the extreme seriousness of the offence, in 
accordance with article 7 of the Convention. 
CED The Committee encourages the State party to ensure that persons suspected VenJ 
19 of having committed an offence of enforced disappearance are not in a 
position to influence investigations by directly or indirectly obstructing them. 
For this reason, it recommends that the State party adopt an explicit legal 
provision providing for the suspension from duties of officials suspected of 
having committed an enforced disappearance. The Committee further 
recommends that the State party take the necessary measures to ensure that 
all cases of enforced disappearances are only investigated and tried by the 
competent civil authorities. 
 
CED The Committee recommends that the State party adopt the necessary steps VenJ 
21 to ensure that the existing protection measures are effectively applied with 
regard to all persons referred to in article 12, paragraph 1, of the Convention. 
 
CED The Committee calls on the State party to ensure that the appeals procedure VenJ 
23 against a decision to extradite, return or expel provides for a substantive 
review of the application when assessing whether there are grounds for 
believing that the applicant would be in danger of being subjected to enforced 
disappearance. 
 
CED The Committee recommends that the State party keep up its efforts to ensure VenJ 
27 that all registers of persons deprived of their liberty are properly completed 
and regularly updated, with at least the information required under article 17, 
paragraph 3, of the Convention. In addition, the Committee recommends that 
the State party establish effective methods of inspection to verify regularly 
that records are properly completed and updated. 
 
CED The Committee recommends that the State party adopt the requisite VenJ 
29 measures to ensure that any person with a legitimate interest has the right to 
gain access to at least the information contained in article 18, paragraph 1, of 
the Convention and a real possibility of being able to do so. The Committee 
calls on the State party to guarantee that those persons have access to 
prompt and effective judicial remedies to obtain that information without 
delay, as established in article 20, paragraph 2, of the Convention, and the 
possibility of appealing against a refusal to disclose this information. 
 
103
