Geneesmiddelen 
CESCR Het Comité verzoekt de Verdragsstaat dringend om rekening te houden met VWS 
28 diens internationale verplichting om ieders recht op de hoogst mogelijke 
gezondheidszorgstandaard na te leven en om in de toekomst af te zien van 
dergelijke beslagleggingen [om TRIPS-consistente partijen generieke 
geneesmiddelen van het ene naar het andere ontwikkelingsland te 
verzenden]. 
  
Specifieke instituten 
CPT 37 Penitentiaire Inrichting Veenhuizen: The CPT recommends to increase the VenJ 
medical staffing level at Veenhuizen penitentiary establishment to two full 
time equivalent (FTE) posts of medical doctor. 
 
CPT 66 Rotterdam Airport Detention Centre: The CPT recommends to increase the VenJ 
medical staffing level at the Centre to at least 1.5 FTE posts of medical 
doctors. 
 
CPT 96 FPC Dr. S. van Mesdag:  The CPT recommends to take the necessary steps to VWS 
 further develop workshops and other communal therapeutic activities, in 
parallel with the rising number of patients. This will require both infrastructure 
development and additional staff resources. 
 
CPT 97 FPC Dr. S. van Mesdag:  The CPT recommends to take appropriate measures VWS 
so that more staff with specific therapeutic skills, in particular psychiatric 
nurses, treat patients with severe psychiatric disorders in Units Eeems 1 & 2 
and Dollard 1 & 2. 
 
CPT 98 FPC Dr. S. van Mesdag:  The CPT recommends to take urgent measures in VWS 
order to address adequately the situation of ten psychotic patients who had 
remained in the “instroom” process for more than a year. 
 
CPT FPC Dr. S. van Mesdag:  The CPT recommends to pursue vigorously efforts to VWS 
100 fill the vacant posts of psychiatrists. 
 
CPT FPC Dr. S. van Mesdag:  The CPT recommends the Dutch authorities to train VWS 
100 more forensic psychiatrists in the Netherlands. 
 
CPT FPC Dr. S. van Mesdag:  The CPT recommends to take measures to ensure an VWS 
101 increase in the number of posts for socio-therapists at the FPC. 
 
CPT FPC Dr. S. van Mesdag:  The CPT recommends to take steps to ensure that VWS 
104 patients who are the subject of an isolation measure are offered outdoor 
exercise on a daily basis. 
 
CPT FPC Dr. S. van Mesdag:  The CPT recommends to review the VWS 
106 restraint/immobilisation techniques used vis-à-vis agitated patients, in the 
light of the remarks in paragraph 106, and adapt the training of the security 
team accordingly. 
 
CPT FPC Dr. S. van Mesdag:  he CPT recommends to take steps with a view to VWS 
106 systematically recording the events, as captured by the CCTV system, 
whenever an incident occurs in the FPC. 
 
108
