CAT Het Comité beveelt de Verdragsstaat aan:  VenJ 
23 
(a) Het op de hoogte te stellen van maatregelen om te zorgen voor direct, 
onpartijdig en effectief onderzoek naar alle beschuldigingen van foltering en 
mishandeling in detentie-inrichtingen, waaronder immigratiedetentiecentra, 
en maatregelen om daders voor het gerecht te brengen en de slachtoffers 
gepast te compenseren;  
(b) De invloed van dergelijke maatregelen op het verminderen van het aantal 
zaken van mishandeling in alle detentie-inrichtingen te beoordelen en het 
Comité daarvan op de hoogte te stellen; en  
(c) Onafhankelijk, onpartijdig en effectief onderzoek te doen naar geweld 
tussen gedetineerden op Aruba en Curaçao en verzoeken voor compensatie, 
waaronder door familieleden van gedetineerden, te vergemakkelijken.   
CAT Het Comité beveelt de Verdragsstaat aan om diepgaand onderzoek uit te VenJ 
26 voeren naar overlijdensgevallen en vast te stellen of er een verband is tussen 
het gebruik van fysieke beperkingen en de overlijdensgevallen in detentie-
instellingen.  
 
CPT 15 The CPT recommends to amend Article 62 of the Code of Criminal Procedure VenJ 
in order to circumscribe more precisely the possibility to delay the exercise of 
a detained person’s right to notify his/her deprivation of liberty to a third 
party and to set a time-limit on the application of such a measure. 
 
CPT 20 The CPT recommends to remind all police officers of the purpose and content VenJ 
of Article 32 (2) of the Police Guidelines relating to access to a doctor of one’s 
own choice. 
 
CPT 23 The CPT recommends to strictly limit the use of the cubicles described in VenJ 
2
paragraph 23 to very brief waiting periods, either immediately prior to the 
questioning of the suspect or immediately before his transfer to a suitable 
detention facility. The total time actually spent in these facilities should never 
exceed 6 hours. Furthermore, such cubicles should never be used as 
overnight accommodation. 
CPT 31 The CPT recommends to draw the attention of management and staff working VenJ 
in all establishments under the responsibility of the National Agency for 
Correctional Institutions to the ministerial circular of 9 January 2003. 
 
CPT 32 The CPT recommends to take steps to ensure that the principles outlined in VenJ 
3
paragraph 32 as regards strips searches are applied throughout the prison 
system in the Netherlands. 
 
                                                           
2
 At Sprang-Capelle Police Station, the detention facility consisted of six confined and windowless cubicles, 
immediately adjacent to two interrogation rooms. Each of the cubicles was fitted with solid doors, measured 
1.40m x 1.40m (i.e. just less than 2 m²), with a seat (a concrete block) measuring 50 x 50 cm as sole 
equipment. 
3
 …resort to strip searches should be based on an individual risk assessment and subject to rigorous criteria and 
supervision. Every reasonable effort should be made to minimise embarrassment; detained persons who are 
searched should not normally be required to remove all their clothes at the same time, e.g. a person should be 
allowed to remove clothing above the waist and to get dressed before removing further clothing. In addition, 
more than one officer should, as a rule, be present during any strip search as a protection to detained persons 
and staff alike. Further, inmates should not be required to undress in the presence of custodial staff of the 
opposite sex. 
111
