CED The Committee recommends that the State party remove the restriction set VenJ/
25 out in section 7, paragraph 2, of the Netherlands Institute for Human Rights BZK 
Act in order to ensure unrestricted access of the Institute to all places of 
detention. The Committee also recommends that the State party ensure that 
the national preventive mechanism enjoys complete financial and operational 
independence from the executive, as recommended by the Committee against 
Torture. The Committee encourages the State party to ensure that those 
bodies are also able to discharge their functions in the Caribbean part of the 
Netherlands effectively. 
CED The Committee recommends that the State party keep up its efforts to ensure VenJ 
27 that all registers of persons deprived of their liberty are properly completed 
and regularly updated, with at least the information required under article 17, 
paragraph 3, of the Convention. In addition, the Committee recommends that 
the State party establish effective methods of inspection to verify regularly 
that records are properly completed and updated. 
 
CED The Committee recommends that the State party adopt the requisite VenJ 
29 measures to ensure that any person with a legitimate interest has the right to 
gain access to at least the information contained in article 18, paragraph 1, of 
the Convention and a real possibility of being able to do so. The Committee 
calls on the State party to guarantee that those persons have access to 
prompt and effective judicial remedies to obtain that information without 
delay, as established in article 20, paragraph 2, of the Convention, and the 
possibility of appealing against a refusal to disclose this information. 
 
CED The Committee recommends that the State party ensure that all law VenJ 
31 enforcement personnel, whether civil or military, medical personnel, public 
officials, including migration officials, and other persons who may be involved 
in the custody or treatment of any person deprived of liberty, including 
judges, prosecutors and other court officials of all ranks, receive appropriate 
and regular training on the provisions of the Convention, in conformity with 
article 23 of the Convention. 
 
  
Caribisch Nederland 
BuPo De Verdragsstaat dient met voorrang te garanderen dat de omstandigheden in  VenJ 
23 detentievoorzieningen [in de Bon Futuro gevangenis en het Huis van Bewaring 
op Bonaire] verbeteren zodat aan de in artikel 10, lid 1, vermelde standaard 
wordt voldaan.  
 
BuPo De Verdragsstaat dient te voorkomen dat gedetineerden slecht worden VenJ 
24 behandeld door de politie en andere overheidsfunctionarissen in het 
gevangeniswezen en dient mensen die zich daar schuldig aan maken, te 
straffen, en dient, met spoed, te garanderen dat gevangenispersoneel 
getraind wordt in de toepassing van de Standaard Minimumregels voor de 
Behandeling van Gevangenen uit 1955. [NB: aanbeveling refereert aan de 
Bon Futuro Gevangenis, het Huis van Bewaring op Bonaire en de 
illegalenbarakken.] 
 
113
