UPR Wettelijke bepalingen aannemen voor minder werkuren, aanvullende SZW 
98.91 betaalde vakantiedagen of een andere vorm van compensatie in gevaarlijke 
en ongezonde beroepen (Polen). 
 
ESH 2.5 The Committee concludes that the situation in the Netherlands is not in SZW 
conformity with Article 2§5 of the Charter on the ground that, in certain 
sectors, there are insufficient safeguards to prevent that workers may work 
for more than twelve consecutive days before being granted a rest period. 
ESH 3.4 The Committee concludes that the situation in Netherlands is not in SZW 
conformity with Article 3§4 of the Charter on the ground that it has not been 
established that there is a strategy to progressively institute access to 
occupational health services for all workers in all sectors of the economy. 
ESH 4.1 The Committee concludes that the situation in the Netherlands is not in SZW 
conformity with Article 4§1 of the Charter on the grounds that: 
- It has not been established that the statutory minimum wage ensures a 
decent standard of living; 
- The reduced rates of the statutory minimum wages applicable to young 
workers are manifestly unfair.  
ESH 4.2 The Committee concludes that the situation in the Netherlands is not in SZW 
conformity with Article 4§2 of the Charter, on the ground that workers may 
be asked to work extended hours without any of these counting as overtime 
and therefore not remunerated at an increased rate. 
ESH 4.4 The Committee concludes that the situation in the Netherlands is not in SZW 
conformity with Article 4§4 of the Charter on the grounds that: 
- notice periods are not reasonable; 
- no notice of termination is required during the probationary period.  
ESH 24 The Committee concludes that the situation in the Netherlands is not in SZW 
conformity with Article 24 of the Charter on the ground that the termination 
of employment on the sole ground that the person has reached the 
pensionable age, which is permitted by law, is not justified. 
ESH The Committee concludes that the situation in Netherlands is not in SZW/ 
26.2 conformity with Article 26§2 of the Charter on the ground that it has not VenJ 
been established that employees are effectively protected, in law or in 
practice, against moral (psychological) harassment. 
GRETA 1 GRETA invites the Dutch authorities to: VenJ 
- continue and further strengthen their efforts against human trafficking for 
the purpose of labour exploitation, including by doing more to raise 
awareness of this type of trafficking among professionals (such as 
policemen, prosecutors, judges, labour inspectors, municipalities and trade 
unions), in high risk sectors (e.g. agriculture, horticultural, catering, dock 
work, meat processing and construction), as well as among the public at 
large; 
- further restrict employment contracts with benefits in kind and tighten 
regulations on employment agencies. 
120
