Armoedebestrijding 
 Aanbeveling Min. 
CESCR Het Comité herhaalt zijn aanbeveling en roept de Verdragsstaat op om diens SZW 
16 inspanningen ter bestrijding van de werkloosheid te intensiveren, met name 
op Aruba en de eilanden van de voormalige Nederlandse Antillen. Het 
Comité beveelt aan dat de Verdragsstaat Algemene Aanbeveling nr. 18 over 
het recht op werk meeweegt bij het aannemen en uitvoeren van diens 
werkgelegenheidsbeleid.  
 
CESCR Het Comité verzoekt de Verdragsstaat dringend om alle nodige maatregelen SZW 
19 te blijven nemen om grotere bekendheid te geven aan het recht op bijstand, 
zowel in Nederland als op de eilanden van de voormalige Antillen, en ervoor 
te zorgen dat alle individuen en huishoudens die bijstand nodig hebben, daar 
daadwerkelijke toegang toe hebben. Het Comité stimuleert de Verdragsstaat 
ook om deze maatregelen op te nemen in de nationale actieplannen tegen 
armoede. 
 
CESCR The Committee urges the State party to combat poverty and social exclusion SZW 
24 by targeting disadvantaged and marginalized groups, such as single parent 
families, migrants and children, and reiterates its recommendation calling on 
the State party to: a) establish, for each constituent country, an official 
poverty line which would enable the State party to assess the extent of 
poverty and monitor and evaluate progress; and b) draw up and implement 
anti-poverty strategies and action plans, taking full account of economic, 
social and cultural rights. In this regard, the Committee refers the State 
party to its statement on “Poverty and the International Covenant on 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights” (2001). 
 
Comm The Commissioner is concerned at the negative impact of growing child SZW/
165 poverty on the enjoyment of children’s rights in the Netherlands. He stresses VWS 
that in times of economic crisis, the Dutch government has the duty to 
protect the most vulnerable from a reduction in the enjoyment of their 
human rights, in particular social and economic rights. Children at risk of 
poverty should not be further negatively impacted by budget cuts taken by 
the government in response to the economic crisis. The Commissioner 
recommends that, in response to the increasing poverty of children and in 
order to avoid regression on standards achieved, any envisaged budget cuts 
should be carefully assessed for their impact on the particularly vulnerable 
group constituted by children at risk of poverty and social exclusion. 
 
Comm The Commissioner also invites the Dutch authorities to implement the BZK/
166 recommendations made by the Children’s Ombudsman who asked SZW 
municipalities to develop an integrated anti-poverty policy specifically geared 
to children and inform actively the families concerned about existing 
assistance measures. The Commissioner underlines that policies aimed at 
combating poverty should not only target persons living on social benefits 
but also the working poor, including those who are selfemployed, and their 
children. The central government should monitor municipal anti-poverty 
policies with a view to ensuring that no child is left outside the scope of 
these measures and that they are effective. 
 
124
