-    
Executive Summary 
This document is the final report on the evaluation of the cooperation programmes implemented by the Stichting 
Ontwikkeling Nederlandse Antillen (hereinafter: SONA) during the period from 2008 to 2014 in Curaçao. PwC 
performed this evaluation in the period March - October 2015. In addition, PwC also performed an evaluation 
into the cooperation programmes for Sint Maarten and the public entities of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba. 
This evaluation was commissioned by the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations (hereinafter: BZK). 
Main message 
Within the period 2008 – 2014, Curaçao used SONA funds to implement 168 projects. Activities performed 
during these projects had a positive impact on the development of Curaçao. SONA funding gave the government 
of Curaçao the opportunity to work on the construction of its country. The objectives set for the three cooperation 
programmes in 2008, proved to be ambitious. During the same period, Curaçao had to deal with the transition 
towards becoming an autonomous country within the Kingdom of the Netherlands; a transition which took much 
time and effort. The cooperation programmes created an appropriate framework for further developing Curaçao 
and helped Curaçao to maintain its current course. It is up to the government of Curaçao and all its inhabitants 
to maintain this course in the future. 
Background of SONA 
By establishing SONA in 2004 the Netherlands and the former Netherlands Antilles (later the countries of 
Curaçao and Sint Maarten and the public entities Saba, Sint Eustatius and Bonaire) distanced the management 
of cooperation funds, and selection and monitoring of projects, from their own governments. By doing so, they 
complied with the main recommendations of the Werkgroep-Wijers in 2002: this distance could further improve 
the effectiveness of cooperation, and bureaucracy and direct political interference could be minimised. The 
Netherlands funded the cooperation programmes based on a management agreement with SONA, whereby the 
former Netherlands Antilles (later the countries Curaçao and Sint Maarten and the public bodies Saba, Sint 
Eustatius and Bonaire) could submit project proposals which would be assessed and awarded (or not) by the 
Executive organisation SONA (hereinafter: USONA). The Netherlands made the last payment to SONA at the 
end of 2012. In total, the Netherlands paid ANG 275.6 million (approximately €141.9 million) to SONA, which 
benefited Curaçao. The cooperation programmes were brought to an end in 2014. 
Three cooperation programmes 
The cooperation funds are divided into three programmes: Institutional Strengthening and Reinforcement 
(hereinafter: IVB), Education and Youth Cooperation (hereinafter: OJSP) and Social Economic Initiative 
(hereinafter: SEI). The main objectives of these programmes were (in short): 
Programme Main objectives 
IVB  To realise an appropriate government structure for Curaçao, which is embedded in the organisation of 
Pais Kòrsou and visible and measurable in society. 
OJSP The general education of people in Curaçao’s society, the Caribbean region and the world. Closing gaps 
and increasing the general level of education. Greater focus on the region and the United States.  
SEI Sustainable improvements in the economy and social standards in Curaçao. To improve the 
effectiveness of the labour market.  
 
This evaluation has two objectives: 
 Firstly, it aims to offer the Dutch parliament a global overview about how funding via SONA has 
contributed to pre-defined programme objectives for the cooperation programmes. 
 Secondly, the evaluation aims to make recommendations to Curaçao about how improvements initiated 
by the cooperation programmes should be preserved and sustained. 
 
  
PwC Pagina 8 van 112
