-    
Results 
The research questions in this evaluation involve four themes: effectiveness, sustainability, efficiency and impact 
of the three cooperation programmes. The research method for the evaluation has been described in paragraph 
1.4 of this report and fully elaborated in Annex C. At the beginning of chapters 3 (effectiveness), 4 (sustainability), 
5 (efficiency) and 6 (impact), a brief explanation has been provided about how we have answered each research 
question. 
Conclusions  
Based on activities carried out in all 168 projects, an in-depth examination of the ten projects as well as interim 
and final reports for each programme, we can conclude the following concerning the effectiveness of the 
cooperation programmes: 
1. The primary objectives of the cooperation programmes were aimed at realising social impact which was 
described in ambitious and abstract terms. For example, the aim of IVB was to “establish an appropriate 
government structure for Curaçao”. Together with the lack of a baseline measurement, this made it difficult 
to measure the effect of the cooperation programmes. Given the position of Curaçao, the available 
programme budget and the initially expected duration of four years, the goals were too ambitious. An 
example of this is the SEI programme’s sub-objective “Restructuring the economy: stimulating economic 
growth to 4% per year, and reducing unemployment by 2-3 percentage points per year”. At the same time, 
such lofty ambitions are understandable given the challenges Curaçao was facing in 2008. It is worth 
mentioning that the cooperation programmes – and the political agreements between the Netherlands and 
Curaçao – were not tested for feasibility before they were agreed and carried out by Curaçao. Beforehand 
it was unclear whether implementing all projects within a cooperation programme would lead to 
programme objectives being realised. 
2. Project proposals reflect the project’s contribution to the social effects identified in the cooperation 
programme. The assessment by USONA involved assessing the feasibility of project proposals. The 
relationship between project objectives, results and activities in project proposals was then – partly via the 
intervention of USONA – strengthened and activities performed within the project were further specified. 
The intervention logic was confirmed in financing agreements between SONA and the government of 
Curaçao. This helped to increase the project’s potential impact on society, while also focusing attention on 
realising activities defined in the financing agreement. 
3. The final reports show that over half of the planned activities were realized in 92% of the projects. Over 
80% of planned activities were realized in approximately 78% of the projects. In this sense, the projects 
also made a positive contribution to the programme objectives. The table below shows the extent to which 
activities in projects were realised for each of the cooperation programmes: 
 Realization of activities within  a project  IVB  OJSP  SEI 
 > 50%  91%  90%  93% 
 > 80%  78%  66%  83% 
 
4. Final reports for the projects showed that most projects made a positive contribution to the objectives of 
programmes: 
a. The IVB projects have had a positive impact on the transition process; establishment and 
reinforcement of the ministries; strengthening of High Councils of State; development of 
legislation and policy; development of information management within the government; 
improvement in the capacity of the tax authority and professional development at the Ministry of 
Finance. However, financial management in other parts of the government still needs to be 
improved. 
b. The educational projects have realised their activities, except for apprenticeships where a relatively 
low return was witnessed. Pre-requisites for the improvement of education have been realized, 
such as curriculum development, improved housing, construction of a support structure, digital 
student monitoring systems, competence development of teachers and school leaders and the 
  
PwC Pagina 9 van 112
