-    
purchase of teaching materials. Implementation of the projects has helped to make a substantial 
improvement to Curaçao’s education system, but that the level of ambition in the interventions has 
proven to be too high. 
c. All except two projects were implemented within the SEI. Reprioritisation had a positive impact on 
the number of implemented activities. Nonetheless, main objectives at macro level have not been 
achieved, which can partly be attributed to the unrealistically high ambitions. These ambitions did 
not take into account external influences and the potential impact of proposed investments. The 
investments and proposed measures were too small in magnitude to achieve the desired societal 
effects at macroeconomic level. Some positive results can be seen in terms of specific policy areas 
within the SEI. 
We should mention that, based on the realisation percentages of project activities, conclusions cannot be 
drawn about the extent to which programme objectives were realised. 
5. Considering interim and final reports, the following can be concluded for the various cooperation 
programmes: 
a. A third of the IVB projects have not been (fully) implemented. For example, the study about 
administrative efficiency has not been carried out. This can partly be attributed to the Action Plan 
IVB that the government of Curaçao has drafted following recommendations in the interim 
evaluation for 2011. The government has used the Action Plan and its new priorities to revise the 
means available for the various programmes. During the period 2012-2014, a number of fund 
allocations were carried out, which actually helped to reinforce focus. The final report of the IVB 
addresses the extent to which activities and project outputs have been realised and gives 
information about the extent to which objectives for each programme have been realised. The 
completed projects helped to construct and organise government bodies; improve the quality of 
government service; improve the government’s customer orientation; improve oversight and 
enforcement and improve financial management. 
b. In terms of the OJSP, we can conclude that projects created the conditions needed to meet the 
objectives, but indicators in monitoring scans carried on the OJSP show that performance is still 
lagging (far) behind the programme’s level of ambition. 
c. The final report for the SEI does not offer an insight into the extent to which programme objectives 
have been realised. However, it does show that the SEI has had a major impact. The quick scan 
performed in 2011 identified critical concerns about limited coherence in many of projects in the 
five thematic areas of the SEI. 
6. The available macro studies for the period 2008-2014 only relate to a few of the IVB objectives. One 
study shows that supervisory bodies have been reinforced, but that enforcement and compliance have not 
followed suit. Another study shows positive developments in the field of financial management. In terms 
of the OJSP, no additional studies have been found. With regards to the SEI, macro studies do not show 
the intended improvements in poverty, economic growth or employment. As already mentioned, we 
should bear in mind that ambitions for these areas were unrealistically high, given the structure of 
Curaçao’s society and economy. With regards to other policy areas in the SEI, no additional studies have 
been found.  
Based on the in-depth analysis of ten selected projects, we can conclude the following about the sustainability of 
the cooperation programmes: 
1. We see that no feasibility studies were carried out to assess the financial sustainability of any of the three 
cooperation programmes prior to their start. This meant a certain risk was accepted at the political level. 
We believe that the financial sustainability of programmes, i.e. structurally embedding the maintenance 
and management of all project results into the budget of Curaçao, could have been focussed on in 
advance. This becomes clear when the total budget of the three cooperation programmes is compared to 
  
PwC Pagina 10 van 112
