-    
the annual budget of Curaçao: ANG 275.6 million compared to the annual budget of ANG 1,743 million 
(2012), or 15.8%. 
2. The study performed by the IVB programme bureau shows that financial sustainability of IVB results has 
been properly safeguarded. The three IVB projects in our in-depth analysis confirm this assessment. 
Financial sustainability is a matter of concern for the OJSP, which is also clearly indicated by two of the 
three projects in our in-depth analysis. The four SEI projects we analysed show a mixed picture when it 
comes to financially safeguarding the results. 
3. Institutional sustainability, and the incorporation of knowledge and experience into policy, have been 
largely safeguarded for IVB and OJSP, but only partly for the SEI: 
a. Institutional and policy-related sustainability in the IVB has largely been safeguarded. The new 
administrative organisation has been embedded into the legal structure and policy; HR policy has 
been formulated and is being implemented; digital information and administration systems have 
been implemented; and the housing plan, education plan and change management plan are being 
implemented. Institutional and policy-related sustainability in the OJSP has largely been 
safeguarded by converting policy about the FO, VSBO, SBO and SVP into law. Various policy areas, 
including language policy and student care, have become the legal responsibility of school boards, 
and have been implemented into their policies. With regards to the SEI, the government has 
followed up SEI projects in several areas, namely economic restructuring and healthcare. Two of 
the four SEI projects in our in-depth analysis confirm this impression. The Rumbo pa Trabou 
project, which was aimed at leading people in long-term unemployment to the labour market, has 
only been followed up to a very limited extent. In the Scharloo Abou project, the project’s concept 
appears to have been implemented in other places, but the institutional sustainability of the 
project’s own results is sub-standard. We are convinced that institutional and policy-related 
sustainability has been properly safeguarded in five of the ten projects we studied in-depth; this 
was not the case in the other five. 
b. There is great variety in the extent to which knowledge and experience are institutionally 
embedded. When working with people from the government itself, we noticed a “learning curve” in 
terms of project management experience. This was an important side effect of the cooperation 
programmes and contributed to institutional sustainability. This was not so much the case when 
working with temporary/insourced employees.  
c. Cooperation between government bodies (IVB), between government and educational institutions 
(OJSP) and between government/schools and businesses (OJSP-vocational education and SEI-
labour market) has proven to be a critical success factor for achieving sustainable results in almost 
all projects in our in-depth analysis. There was a risk to long-term sustainability when such 
cooperation could not be ensured in the projects . 
d. Due to political changes in Curaçao, it was a challenge to embed (the results of) projects into 
government policy. When projects show direct, tangible results, it appears to be easy to maintain 
or further develop policy or institutions.  
Based on the in-depth analysis of ten selected projects in Curaçao, we can conclude the following about the 
efficiency of the cooperation programmes: 
1. In terms of deliverables within a project, people and resources were deployed efficiently. This applies to 
projects in all three of the cooperation programmes. There were mixed fortunes concerning the efficiency 
of the more ambitious project objectives (social effect). In the IVB and SEI, in particular, most of the 
projects have been fairly effective considering the available budget, while some projects in all three 
cooperation programmes have not (yet) been very effective at all. All OSJP projects under Sociale 
Vormingsplicht (social education) have not been very efficient. All things considered, these projects have 
(thus far) had little impact on society and cannot be regarded as efficient. 
  
PwC Pagina 11 van 112
