-    
2. The fact that most of the ten projects studied in-depth have helped to achieve programme objectives, can 
partly be attributed to the role played by USONA in supervising the design and implementation of 
projects. 
3. We feel that we have not been able to measure the extent to which agreed co-financing was realised in the 
implemented projects. Only a small part (5.19%) of the agreed co-financing was paid directly by January 
2015, as determined by the Stichting Overheidsaccountantsbureau (SOAB) in its final report on the SEI. 
In terms of the IVB, SOAB has set this rate at just below 50%. However, interviewees involved in these 
programmes stated that the government of Curaçao has contributed to co-financing in many other ways, 
including assuming control of complete projects at the expense of the government budget; co-financing 
via contributions from government companies; or deployment of government employees. From this 
perspective, it is claimed that more than the agreed amount of co-financing was implemented. 
Implemented co-financing has proven to be difficult to measure. To give an example, interviewees said 
the amount of time spent by task managers in the OJSP cannot be measured because it was not 
registered separately from their regular tasks. 
4. The underlying principle of the cooperation programmes is that the government of Curaçao bears 
responsibility for submitted projects, from writing the proposal to the evaluation. The Curaçao 
government was responsible for ensuring that all proposed projects would help to realise the objectives of 
the cooperation programmes. Reprioritisation took place while the cooperation programmes were being 
implemented. This reprioritisation was aimed at increasing the sustainability, efficiency and effectiveness 
of the programmes and was partly based on the results of interim evaluations. The aim was to improve 
compatibility between projects and policy areas, and to thus achieve higher efficiency in the cooperation 
programmes. 
5. There was a mixed picture concerning the efficiency with which cooperation programmes were 
implemented. The stakeholders – the governments of the Netherlands and Curaçao, SONA and its 
executive organisation USONA – have actively promoted efficient use of funds from cooperation 
programmes by reprioritising and granting extensions. Besides this, none of the stakeholders involved in 
regularly shaping and assessing project proposals visibly intervened in order to safeguard the efficiency 
of cooperation programmes: project proposals were assessed individually, and not comparatively, and 
normally in the order they were received. This method complies with procedural arrangements for the 
cooperation programmes between the Netherlands, Curaçao, SONA and USONA. Nevertheless, this has 
limited the efficiency of the cooperation programmes as a whole. 
Based on a general assessment of effectiveness, an in-depth examination of ten selected projects in Curaçao and 
the reports for each programme, we can conclude the following about the impact of the cooperation programmes: 
1. Considering the position of Curaçao in 2008 in all thematic areas of cooperation programmes, we can 
conclude that the cooperation programmes have had a positive impact on Curaçao’s society. At the same 
time, we can conclude that the objectives of the cooperation programmes have not been realised to some 
extent. The following factors explain this: 
a. In Curaçao, many projects were carried out in cooperation programmes at a time when the 
government of Curaçao was facing a major transition. The government of Curaçao was formed by 
merging the island government with the government of the Netherlands Antilles. Beforehand, one 
could have expected this to jeopardise the impact (and effectiveness and sustainability) of the 
cooperation programmes. 
b. As far as the cooperation programmes are concerned, the available budget was relatively high 
compared to the budget of Curaçao (15.8% of annual national budget). This relatively high budget 
was spread across many projects, making project management a great burden on the government 
apparatus. 
c. The measures to be taken in the programmes were identified, but an assessment was not carried 
out in advance to see whether these measures would have the biggest possible impact on 
programme objectives. It is impossible to tell whether the investments would have had more 
  
PwC Pagina 12 van 1
