-    
impact if a feasibility study had been carried out for the programmes. Program feasibility was also 
not addressed when monitoring the programmes. 
2. We see the previously identified learning curve in project management and the role of policy as a positive 
impact of the cooperation programmes. 
Recommendations to Curaçao  
1. We recommend the government of Curaçao to safeguard the impact of projects financed from SONA 
resources, by determining whether or not each project has been embedded in government policy and, if 
so, whether other financial or institutional resources can be tapped than those of the government itself. 
Any cooperation with third parties requires clear understanding of everyone's interests and clear 
collaboration agreements.  
We also advise the government of Curaçao to determine exactly which activities and replacement 
investments are needed over time in order to maintain the impact of the projects. On this basis, clear 
choices have to be made about which project results have priority, so appropriate attention and budget 
can be assigned to the most important achievements.  
2. We recommend identify officials from the Curaçao government who have gained a lot of experience with 
projects in cooperation programmes. The knowledge and experience of these government employees 
makes them valuable human resources for the government. We thus recommend assigning these 
personnel to important new projects and programmes, so their past experiences can be used effectively: 
a. In terms of the IVB, we recommend determining which parts of the programme require 
government approval; supporting legal measures and prioritising necessary decision making. 
b. We recommend assessing whether already implemented activities, for increasing the sustainability 
of the OJSP, have fully realised the programme’s results, and to determine whether additional 
measures might be needed, particularly when ensuring future financing for the programme’s 
results. 
c. We recommend deciding which results of the SEI will be prioritised to ensure long-term 
sustainability, and which role the government will play in ensuring this. This includes the 
possibility of cooperating with third parties (see recommendation 1). 
3. Curaçao has now been an autonomous country for five years and remains a country in development. We 
recommend the government of Curaçao to formulate specific objectives when new projects are started, 
which are financed from its own budget, measurable and realistic (in consultation with project 
stakeholders). We also recommend performing a baseline assessment on indicators used to measure its 
objectives, so the starting position will be clear. This will allow the government to clearly determine 
whether results are actually are achieved., and to better determine which circumstances contributed to 
good or bad project results.  
We also recommend the government of Curaçao to select specific components which will require 
government attention (in terms of money and manpower) in the future. By exercising more central 
influence on government projects that will be implemented in the future, it will be possible to increase 
the focus, effectiveness, sustainability and impact of government projects.  
4. Good results were realised in projects involving the realisation of physical infrastructure or the purchase 
and commissioning of production facilities. It was more difficult to realise objective that focussed on 
interventions in human (cultural, organizational) behaviour.  
We recommend the government of Curaçao to precisely determine the goals and expected results of 
projects, and to shape activities in projects so realised objectives and results can be monitored during 
project implementation. Because projects aimed at changing human behaviour can be complex, it is 
essential to engage the right knowledge (i.e. psychologists, behavioural scientists, experts or 
organisational change experts) in order to guarantee success.   
  
PwC Pagina 13 van 112
