-    
population and to brain-drain, and reliant on a limited number of « supporting revenues » and 
economic activities. 
Beyond these unavoidable constraints and challenges, Curacao shows a number of specific macro 
weaknesses that have been substantially hampering economic growth: overall investment spending in 
the economy is high, but it is associated with low economic returns, indicating that efficient investment 
is insufficient. Domestic savings are also too low and poorly intermediated into the domestic economy, 
with large liquidity coinciding with persistent difficulties in access to finance by SMEs. 
The diagnostic points to the lack of “profitable opportunities” as a major disincentive for higher-
efficiëntie investment spending (profitability is too low, and the regulatory and business environment 
is burdensome); in parallel, the diagnostic highlights the very poor performances of Curacao in terms 
of productivity gains, related to a complex set of inadequate skills, unfavourable attitudes and 
perceptions, and poor regulatory background. 
Unfortunately, Curacao has to face these structural challenges at a time of cyclical constraints and 
subdued international environment. The country is currently experiencing an unsustainable 
combination of low economic growth, large fiscal and external deficits and low foreign currency 
reserves. The lingering effects of the global / European financial crisis, the uncertainties in Latin 
America and the structural changes in international financial regulation regarding off-shore centers 
are simultaneously making the situation more complex and the changes more urgently required.  
(…)  
Simulations show that average annual rates above 2.5% or 3.0% for Curacao’s GDP can be achieved by 
moving towards the skills, productivity and business environments observed in the other benchmark 
countries. [PwC: Trinidad & Tobago, Barbados, Bahamas, Singapore]. 
In parallel, Curacao should recognize, and capitalize on one key benefit of being a “small size” economy: 
dealing with structural constraints should be less complex and more consensual than in larger 
economies. The country should be able to better capitalize on its existing strengths, from its 
multilingual/multicultural population to professionalism in international finance and tourism 
attractions and including its geographic location and regional opportunities. Curacao has also a 
reasonably well developed infrastructure (telecommunications, road, harbor, airport, power, water/ 
sewage).’ 
Het TAC-rapport met aanbevelingen is in 2014 door de Raad van Ministers van Curaçao aangenomen. De 
minister van Economische Ontwikkeling gaf daarbij aan dat met de implementatie van de aanbevelingen reeds is 
14
begonnen.  
Het Rabobank Country Report 2014 over Curaçao geeft kernachtig de volgende analyse van de Curaçaose 
15
economie: 
‘Sterke punten 
 Hoog inkomensniveau. Vergeleken met andere landen in de regio, kent Curaçao een relatief hoge 
levensstandaard met een inkomen per hoofd van de bevolking van USD 21.306 in 2013. 
 Een relatief sterk institutioneel raamwerk. Het Curaçaose institutioneel raamwerk is redelijk sterk 
vergeleken met andere landen in de regio. Echter, politieke onrust en verhalen over corruptie zijn niet 
ongebruikelijk.  
Zwakke punten 
 Gebrek aan fiscale discipline. Curaçao kende een begrotingstekort in 2010, 2011 en 2012. Dit is een 
verrassing, aangezien Curaçao een begrotingsevenwicht afgesproken heeft in ruil voor de 
                                                             
14
 Amigoe, 13 juni 2014. 
15
 Analyse overgenomen uit Rabobank Country Report Curaçao, 26 augustus 2004. 
  
PwC Pagina 22 van 112
