bijlage 4b
 
  
1. Introduction  
 
1.1 Context of study 
 
In 2021, the Advisory Board Dialogue Group on the Slavery Past (Adviescollege Dialooggroep 
Slavernijverleden) and the Dutch Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations jointly 
approached the T.M.C. Asser Instituut to deliberate on whether the Netherlands should 
introduce a law recognising Dutch slavery and the Dutch slave trade as a crime against 
1 2
humanity. As proposed by Senator Peter Nicolaï in March 2020,  the French Taubira law 
3
(2001) can be utilised as a comparative model for such a memory law on Dutch slavery. 
Moreover, there was a request to investigate whether this same memory law should guarantee 
4
the establishment of a national monument, knowledge centre, and museum. The Asser Institute 
was requested to provide a framework that examines various parts of the Motie within an 
international and European legal context. The present study highlights the results of this 
investigation.   
 
The study, therefore, looks into the Motie Nicolaï foremost from the perspective of memory 
laws and policies. In this respect, ‘memory laws’ should be understood as encompassing various 
forms of legal memory governance that enshrine state-approved interpretations of crucial 
5
historical events. The domain of ‘law and historical memory’ could be conceived more 
broadly, comprising a variety of ways in which governing entities use legal norms or procedures 
– prescribed or discretionary, written or unwritten, formal or informal – to influence the public 
understanding of past events. The terminology of memory laws (as laws and specific provisions 
6
in statutes formally adopted by states) emerged only in the 2000s, even though legal means 
have long been used to influence public knowledge or opinion about the past, extending, for 
7
example, to government control over media, education, culture and other civil spheres. Social 
 
*Dr. Ulad Belavusau is a Senior Researcher at the T.M.C. Asser Instituut. The author has delivered the report in 
cooperation with Prof. Janne Nijman, Chairperson of the Executive Board and Academic Director of the T.M.C. 
Asser Instituut, and Dr. Christophe Paulussen, Senior Researcher at the T.M.C. Asser Instituut. He would also like 
to thank Prof. Ernst Hirsch Ballin (University of Tilburg) for his valuable comments on the scope of the Rijkswet 
and Chianna Shah BSc, intern at the T.M.C. Asser Instituut, for her valuable research assistance. 
1
 Following the wording of the Motie Nicolaï (infra note 2): “[…] verzoekt de regering om na te gaan of er reden 
bestaat om – net zoals in Frankrijk – bij wet de slavernij en de slavenhandel die in het verleden heeft 
plaatsgevonden als een misdaad tegen de menselijkheid aan te merken”.  
2
 35 300 VI, Motie van het lid Nicolaï c.s. (10 maart 2020), Vaststelling van de begrotingsstaten van het Ministerie 
van Justitie en Veiligheid (VI) voor het jaar 2020, available at: 
https://www.eerstekamer.nl/behandeling/20200310/motie_van_het_lid_nicolai_c_s_over_3/document3/f=/vl7tg
b4w7azy_opgemaakt.pdf.  
3
 Loi n° 2001-434 du 21 mai 2001 tendant à la reconnaissance de la traité et de l'esclavage en tant que crime 
contre l'humanité. 
4
 In this regard, the Motie (supra note 2) itself inquires whether in the same law (should it be adopted), it may be 
possible to guarantee “de oprichting en instandhouding van een Nationaal Monument Slavernijverleden, een 
Kenniscentrum Slavernijverleden en een Slavernijmuseum”. 
5
 Sévane Garibian, Pour une lecture juridique des quatre lois “mémorielles”, Esprit, 322, 2, 2006. 158-173. 
Emanuela Fronza, Memory and Punishment: Historical Denialism, Free Speech and the Limits of Criminal Law, 
Springer, 2018; Uladzislau Belavusau and Aleksandra Gliszczyńska-Grabias, The Remarkable Rise of ‘Law and 
Historical Memory’ in Europe: Theorizing Trends and Prospects in Recent Literature, Journal of Law and Society, 
47, 2, 2020.   
6
 Originally lois mémorielles in the French terminology, sometimes translated as herinneringswetten in Dutch by 
analogy with German Erinnerungsgesetze.  
7
 Nikolay Koposov, Memory Laws, Memory Wars: The Politics of the Past in Europe and Russia, Cambridge 
University Press, 2017; Uladzislau Belavusau and Aleksandra Gliszczyńska-Grabias, “Memory Laws: Mapping a 
New Subject in Comparative Law and Transitional Justice”, in U. Belavusau & A. Gliszczyńska-Grabias, Law 
and Memory: Towards Legal Governance of History, Cambridge University Press, 2017. 1-26.   
 3
