scientists often scrutinise memory laws as central to the politics of memory, that is, political 
means by which events are classified, commemorated or discarded to influence community 
8
values and attitudes. However, controversies persist among jurists and scholars concerning the 
legal restrictions placed upon individuals or organisations seeking to deny, to defend, to excuse, 
or to glorify past atrocities. Familiar examples include disagreements, both within and among 
9
Western democracies, about bans on genocide denial (négationnisme). In some cases, although 
not all, governments thereby adopt self-inculpatory readings of predecessor regimes through 
laws that punish individuals or organisations that deny, defend, excuse, or glorify past atrocities. 
10
The Motie Nicolaï seemingly offers to consider the adoption of a self-inculpatory memory 
law for the Netherlands, yet without prescribing punitive effects therein for denialism or 
glorification. By virture of this law, the Netherlands is expected to acknowledge responsibility 
for what happened in its past, namely through a possible qualification of the Dutch slavery and 
11
slave trade as a crime against humanity.   
 
1.2 Structure and methodology of the study  
 
To allow the Advisory Board Dialogue Group on the Slavery Past to answer the questions posed 
by the Motie Nicolaï, this study will investigate the issue, developing an analytical framework 
comprising of rule of law standards and human rights criteria. Following this introduction (the 
first part), the study will offer a brief outlook on the socio-legal background for the Motie 
Nicolaï in the Netherlands and terminological clarifications regarding various aspects of 
memory laws and slavery. This second part will also comprise a short analysis on whether the 
memory law, if adopted, should be enacted as a law of the Kingdom of the Netherlands 
(Rijkswet) or rather belongs to the competence of the Netherlands as such. 
 
The third part of the study will scrutinise international law emerging from the law of the United 
Nations, the law of the Council of Europe (in particular, summarising the most important 
decisions in this field by the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), including legislation 
on genocide denial) and relevant aspects of EU law (such as the Council Decision 2008 on 
xenophobic speech, technically criminalising genocide denial through the EU) that provide a 
framework in adherence with European law. This part of the research will also concern the 
nature of enslavement and how it is framed and defined in international law. 
 
The fourth part will delve into two country studies – France and Poland. The French country 
12
study is particularly relevant as the aforementioned Taubira law is often referenced as a model 
of state engagement with the injustices of slavery. Adopted in 2001, the law recognizes the 
transatlantic slave trade and slavery as constituting a crime against humanity and ensures that 
educational curricula and research programs give this topic substantial focus. However, the 
Taubira law, as part of a broader set of lois mémorielles, has also been criticised by historians 
for producing a single historical narrative and has instigated an increasing number of proposals 
aiming to control the legal governance of history in France. This case study therefore offers a 
 
8
 Eg Stiina Löytömäki, Law and the Politics of Memory: Confronting the Past, Routledge 2014; Maria Mälksoo, 
Militant Memocracy in International Relations: Mnemonical Status Anxiety and Memory Laws in Eastern Europe 
(2021) Review of International Studies; George Soroka and Félix Krawatzek, Nationalism, Democracy, and 
Memory Laws, Journal of Democracy, 30, 2, 2019. 157–71.  
9
 See Robert A Kahn, Holocaust Denial and the Law: A Comparative Study (Palgrave-Macmillan 2004); Emanuela 
Fronza, Memory and Punishment: Historical Denialism, Free Speech and the Limits of Criminal Law, Springer, 
2018.   
10
 For the terminological clarifications, see section 1.3. below.  
11
 See the Motie (cited supra note 2). 
12
 Supra note 3.  
 4
