bijlage 4b
 
  
scrutiny of the oldest similar legislation in force, thereby revealing insights into the pros and 
cons of adopting a similar legislation in the Dutch context. The second country study, Poland, 
is a particularly significant example as the state currently leads in the number of various 
memory laws enacted therein. Under the guise of protecting historical truth, Poland has 
developed an impressive number of laws and policies covering both Polish communist and Nazi 
th
past, as well as the memory of the inter-war period of the 20 century. The Polish governance 
of memory has also involved the establishment of a national institute of remembrance. This 
prolific but contentious example of memory governance offers many lessons that should be 
seriously considered before delivering legislation in the field of memory regulation in the 
Netherlands.  
 
Finally, based on the international and European legal frameworks, as well as the country 
examinations, the fifth part – the conclusions – will provide concrete recommendations which 
the Advisory Board can take into account in its decision-making process 1) whether or not a 
memory law should be introduced in the Netherlands and 2) if so, how such a law should look 
like.  
 
1.3 Terminological clarifications  
 
It should be noted that several classifications of memory laws have been advanced in the 
13
literature in recent years. Memory laws can foremost be viewed as punitive and non-punitive, 
depending on whether they have provisions prescribing a criminal effect for the violation of 
14
their material core. While the absolute majority of memory laws are non-punitive, or 
declarative, as they are sometimes called, the most eminent example of punitive memory laws 
pertains to the group of legal provisions and statutes criminalizing Holocaust denial. Punitive 
memory laws often cover also a disguised group of defamation laws, prescribing criminal 
punishment for the offence of the State, the Nation or the Monarch, when applied in the context 
of speech regarding the past. Some states have also extended (or attempted to extend) the 
provisions on Holocaust denial to cover the negation and trivialisation of other atrocities, such 
as the Armenian and Rwandese genocide. Declaratory memory laws, in contrast, often cover 
various legal acts proclaiming the acknowledgement of a historic fact, respect and particular 
forms of remembrance (especially through the establishment of remembrance days) of the 
victims. This form of memory laws has been popular at the EU and Council of Europe levels, 
as will be demonstrated further in this study, by virtue of various resolutions with a declaratory 
effect. Memory laws can therefore be considered as a variety of legal provisions that cover 
constitutional law (constitutional preambles and articles that address historic past), criminal law 
and civil law. Some citizenship laws also effectively function as memory laws, for example, 
those that simplify access to naturalization for foreigners whose ancestors were expelled from 
citizenship or from the land due to historical injustices of the past towards certain groups, e.g., 
Sephardic Jews in Spain and Portugal. A vast group of memory laws cover soft law regulations, 
administered by municipalities, city and province administrations (usually regarding street (re-
)naming and monuments), as well as regulations of the education ministries prescribing 
teaching curricula regarding history education. Likewise, various statutory regulations 
regarding controversial symbols of the past associated with atrocities (e.g., prohibition of Nazi 
 
13
 For an extensive overview of this literature, see Uladzislau Belavusau and Aleksandra Gliszczyńska-Grabias, 
The Remarkable Rise of ‘Law and Historical Memory’ in Europe: Theorizing Trends and Prospects in Recent 
Literature, Journal of Law and Society, 47, 2, 2020.   
14
 Klaus Bachman, Igor Lyubashenko, Christian Garuka, Grażyna Baranowska, Vjeran Pavlakoc, The Puzzle of 
Punitive Memory Laws: New Insights into the Origins and Scope of Punitive Memory Laws, East European 
Politics and Society, 20, 10, 2021. 1-17.  
 5
