or communist symbols and memorabilia) are also regarded within the realm of memory laws. 
Finally, scholars have been viewing memory laws as self-inculpatory, i.e.  by virtue of which 
15
states voluntarily acknowledge the guilt for past atrocities on their majority nations and 
16
governments, and self-exculpatory, by virtue of which states annihilate themselves and their 
majority nations from past atrocities by attributing them to foreign states and externally-
17
imposed powers.     
 
Slavery has been defined as the ‘status or condition of a person over whom any or all of the 
powers attaching to the right of ownership are exercised’ in Article 1(a) of the 1926 Convention 
18
to Suppress the Slave Trade and Slavery. This formulation, often criticised for its vague and 
supposedly limited nature, places the emphasis on the power attached to the right of ownership 
and therefore can include conditions such as domestic slavery, debt slavery, and sham adoption 
19
as long as the powers are manifested. This emphasis on the powers attached to the right of 
ownership also precludes the argument that slavery requires legal ownership. Indeed, slavery 
is recognised by the power of ownership rights rather than ownership itself. While the substance 
of the right to ownership is not defined, the Secretary-General of the UN in 1953 stated that it 
can be reasonably assumed to parallel the authority of the master over the slave in Roman law 
20
and includes the right to acquire, use, and dispose of a thing in its power. Moreover, this 
definition of slavery includes slavery de jure (status) and slavery de facto (condition) to 
encompass the situations in which slavery is accepted through written legislation and/or the 
custom of the country. The already expansive formulation was widened by the 1956 
Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and 
Practices Similar to Slavery as it stated that ‘Each of the States Parties to this Convention shall 
take all practicable and necessary legislative and other measures to bring about progressively 
and as soon as possible the complete abolition or abandonment of the following institutions and 
practices, where they still exist and whether or not they are covered by the definition of slavery 
21
contained in Article 1 of the Slavery Convention.’ 
 
 
15
 E.g., Germans for the crimes of the Third Reich, the French for slave trade, etc. By analogy, it will mean that 
the majority nation for historic Netherlands is the Dutchmen. The idea of a minority-majority nation invokes 
notions of a country that is politically and socially accountable to its diverse population. For those who hold power, 
it invokes fear that their power and their privilege will be lost. For those who are disenfranchised, it gives hope 
that their voices will soon be heard. See Joan A. Powell, A Majority-Minority Nation: Racing the Population in 
the Twenty-First Century, Fordham Urban Law Journal, 29, 2002. 1395-1415 (at p. 1408).  
16
 For an academic debate about self-inculpatory and self-exculpatory laws, see the exchange between Eric Heinze 
(the major proponent of this terminology) and Antoon de Baets: Eric Heinze, Should Governments Butt out of 
History, Free Speech Debate, 12 March 2019, available at: 
 https://freespeechdebate.com/discuss/should-governments-butt-out-of-history/;  
Antoon de Baets, Self-inculpatory Laws do not Exist, 12 December 2019, Free Speech Debate, available at: 
https://freespeechdebate.com/2019/12/self-inculpatory-laws-do-not-exist/.   
17
 See also George Soroka & Félix Krawatzek, Nationalism, Democracy and Memory Laws, Journal of 
Democracy, 2019. 157-160 (who refer to self-inculpatory and self-exculpatory memory laws as, respectively, 
prescriptive and proscriptive, similarly focusing on the intentions and motivations of the States introducing such 
regulations). 
18
 Slavery Convention (1926), available at: 
https://ec.europa.eu/anti-trafficking/sites/default/files/ilo_1926_slavery_convention_en_1.pdf 
19
 Jean Allain, The Definition of ‘Slavery’ in General International Law and the Crime of Enslavement within the 
Rome Statute, Guest Lecture Series of the Office of the Prosecutor, 2007. 
20
 Ibid.  
21
 Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar 
to Slavery (1956). Available at: 
https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/ProfessionalInterest/slaverytrade.pdf. 
 6
