bijlage 4b
 
  
The crime of enslavement, as defined by the Rome Statute of the permanent International 
Criminal Court (ICC), closely follows the 1926 definition of slavery with the explicit addition 
of trafficking: ‘Enslavement means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right 
of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking 
22
in persons, in particular women and children.’ This definition is expanded upon in the 
Elements of Crimes as drafted by the Preparatory Commission and itemises the powers attached 
to the right of ownership (purchasing, selling, lending or bartering) that a perpetrator may 
exercise and includes the phrase ‘imposing on them a similar deprivation of liberty.’ In detailing 
the actions of the perpetrators as a segment of enslavement, the Rome Statute and the definition 
of enslavement truly reflect and adhere to the fundamental elements of slavery in general 
23
international law, the exercise of ‘any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership.’ 
This adherence was also visible in the Kunarac case (2001) before the earlier-established 
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) wherein the Trial Chamber 
considered ‘the control of someone’s movement, control of physical environment, 
psychological control, measures taken to prevent or deter escape, force, threat of force or 
coercion, duration, assertion of exclusivity, subjection to cruel treatment and abuse, control of 
24
sexuality and forced labour’ as factors in determining whether enslavement was committed. 
 
2. Socio-legal Framework in the Netherlands   
 
2.1 Dutch context   
 
Historically, the Dutch colonial empire comprised of overseas territories, outposts and enclaves 
that were controlled and administered by Dutch chartered companies (the Geoctrooieerde 
Westindische Compagnie (GWC) and the Vereenigde Nederlandsche Oost Indische Compagnie 
(VOC)) and eventually by the Dutch Republic and the Kingdom of the Netherlands. As the 
Dutch controlled a significant portion of international maritime shipping routes, they were able 
to control territories through their strategically placed outposts and trade-based merchant 
25
enterprises. Other smaller European trading companies lacked the ability to rival the EIC and 
WIC and the companies consequently dominated global commerce and initiated the Dutch 
Golden Age in the seventeenth century. 
 
The colonial empire included territories in North America, South America, Africa, South and 
Southeast Asia such as Bengal (1627-1825), the Cape colony (1652-1806) and Guianas (1616-
26
1975). In the eighteenth century, after a series of Anglo-Dutch wars and losses of the latter, 
the Dutch colonial empire began to decline and lost a number of colonial possessions.  
However, the Netherlands retained control over the Dutch East Indies and the Dutch Guianas 
27
until decolonisation unfolded in the second half of the twentieth century. Three former 
colonial territories in the West Indies (Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten) remain as constituent 
countries (landen) within the confines of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. 
 
 
22
 Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (1998), available at: 
 https://www.icc-cpi.int/resource-library/documents/rs-eng.pdf. 
23
 Ibid.  
24
 Prosecutor v. Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir Kovac and Zoran Vukovic (Trial Judgment), IT-96-23-T & IT-96-
23/1-T, International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), 22 February 2001, available at: 
https://www.refworld.org/cases,ICTY,3ae6b7560.html [accessed 26 May 2021].  
25
 Jonathan Israel, Empires and Entrepots: The Dutch, the Spanish Monarchy and the Jews, 1585-1713, 
Hambledon Press, 1990. 
26
 Ibid.  
27
 Ibid. 
 7
