During its period of colonisation, the Netherlands was an active participant in the global slave 
trade and its involvement spanned the seventeenth-nineteenth centuries. Initially, the Dutch 
shipped slaves to Northern Brazil and later had a controlling interest in the trade to the Spanish 
28
colonies. The Netherlands held various fortresses along the Gold Coast of Africa and 
particularly utilised Suriname and Guyana as markets. Due to the profitability of this enterprise, 
the Netherlands was one of the last European countries to abolish slavery in 1863 and the law 
stipulated a mandatory ten-year transition period and paid compensation to ex-slave owners. 
Enslavement continued until 1910 through indirect rule and the total Dutch part in the slave 
29
trade is estimated at 550,000-600,000 Africans. 
 
While the legacy of slavery has resulted in some practices of national remembrance, there is no 
specific legislation condemning slavery in the Netherlands. On 1 July 1863, the Kingdom of 
the Netherlands abolished slavery in Suriname and the Netherlands Antilles with the 
30
Emancipation Act. Ketikoti (or Keti Koti) a holiday marking the abolition of slavery, is 
therefore widely celebrated on 1 July in Suriname and the Netherlands Antilles and there has 
31
been a growing call for its recognition as a national holiday in the Netherlands. Less widely 
known, on 30 June, some primarily Afro-Surinamese groups have been commemorating the so-
32
called Dag van Besef. Hundreds of people come together for a national ceremony of 
consciousness which includes speeches, the playing of multiple national anthems, and 
discussions on the linked history and future between the Netherlands and Suriname and the 
Antillean islands. The Netherlands also has a few monuments dedicated to the remembrance of 
slavery that are located around the country, in particular, the Nationaal monument 
slavernijverleden (Amsterdam), Levensboom, Monument van Besef (Amsterdam), 
Slavernijmonument (Rotterdam), and Zeeuws Slavernijmonument (Middelburg). 
 
The history of enslavement has been also researched and commemorated by virtue of the 
establishment of the Nationaal instituut Nederlands slavernijverleden en erfenis (NiNsee) 
(National Institute for the Study of Dutch Slavery and its Legacy). This publicly funded 
organisation aspired to collect, manage and develop knowledge about the history of the 
33
transatlantic slavery past and the Dutch colonial past. NiNsee additionally organises 
numerous commemoration activities, such as an annual Ketikoti lecture, and emphasises how 
the legacy of enslavement is still affecting the Afro-Caribbean communities, both in social 
positions in society and in the image in the Dutch media. However, the cabinet discontinued 
 
28
 Available at: https://www.ascleiden.nl/content/webdossiers/dutch-involvement-transatlantic-slave-trade-and-
abolition.  
29
 Ibid. See also Paul Bijl, Emerging Memory: Photographs of Colonial Atrocity in Dutch Cultural Remembrance, 
Amsterdam University Press, 2015; Stephen Snelders, Leprosy and Colonialism: Suriname under Dutch Rule: 
1750-1950, Manchester University Press, 2017.  
30
 In Stranantongo (an English-based Creole language spoken in Suriname), this means “the chain is cut” or “the 
chain is broken”. In Suriname it coincides with the Emancipation, as it marks the day when slavery was abolished 
in Suriname in 1863. As of 2009 several cities in the Netherlands hosted various activities, making 30 June a day 
of national celebration and remembrance throughout the country. 
31
 Waarom is Keti Koti geen vrije dag?, 16 Juni 2020, available at: https://www.at5.nl/artikelen/202683/waarom-
is-keti-koti-geen-vrije-dag.  
32
 It can be roughly translated as a “day of consciousness” from Dutch. See Nationale Ceremonie van Besef 
vanavond op Surinameplein in Amsterdam, 30 Juni 2019, available at: 
https://www.waterkant.net/suriname/2019/06/30/nationale-ceremonie-van-besef-vanavond-op-surinameplein-in-
amsterdam/. Al 28 jaar Ceremonie van Besef: 'Ik vergelijk het met de betekenis van 4 mei', 18 juni 2020, available 
at: https://www.at5.nl/artikelen/202736/al-28-jaar-ceremonie-van-besef-ik-vergelijk-het-met-de-betekenis-van-4 
mei#:~:text=Al%2028%20jaar%20lang%20is,hun%20voorouders%20op%20het%20Surinameplein.. 
33
 NiNsee, https://www.ninsee.nl/over-ons. Accessed 17 May 2021. 
 8
