bijlage 4b
 
  
national subsidies to the institute in 2012 and the organisation is now operating on 10% of its 
previous budget via support from the municipality of Amsterdam.  
 
In many countries, including the United States and UK, museums and restitution of artwork 
play a significant role in highlighting the experiences of enslavement. However, this discourse 
has been largely moderate in law and in practice in the Netherlands. Many museums possess 
objects, artefacts and art acquired during the period of slavery and the Golden Age but arguably 
fail to acknowledge the significance of enslavement. The few museums that have engaged with 
this area have done so with temporary exhibitions: for example, the Tropical Museum (KIT) in 
Amsterdam organized a small photography exhibition in 2003 called Sporen van Slavenhandel 
(‘Traces of the Slave Trade’) which referenced the 140th anniversary of the abolition of Dutch 
34
slavery. In May 2021, the major Dutch museum, Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam, organized an 
35
exhibition on Dutch slavery, exposing its brutality.  
 
Similarly, the Netherlands has also withheld from issuing public and formal apologies as other 
states have done. Such statements typically involve a formal acknowledgement of slave trade 
and its abolition and include a ‘call for redemption’ or a future path forward. In 1999, the City 
Council of Liverpool formally apologised for its involvement in slavery and promised to work 
36
with Black communities on racial inequality. There have been no such formal apologies from 
37
officials or government in the Netherlands, despite black organisations calling for them. The 
biggest involvement from government officials has been their presence in the July 1 ceremonies 
in Amsterdam and brief expressions of sorrow with no mention of responsibility. For example, 
on 1 July 2008, at the Emancipation Day Activities in Oosterpark, the Dutch prime minister, 
Jan Peter Balkenende, referred to slavery as ‘a shameful episode in our history, a stain on the 
38
country’s character’.  
 
Beyond the theme of colonialism, the most eminent example of Dutch memory law pertains to 
Article 137 (c and d) of the Criminal Code of the Netherlands (Wetboek van Strafrecht). This 
provision is essentially about incitement of hatred (including on racial and sexual grounds). 
While Holocaust denial is not explicitly illegal in the Netherlands, the courts consider it a form 
of spreading hatred and therefore an offence. According to the Dutch public prosecution office, 
 
34
 Kwame Nimako and Glenn Willemsen, The Dutch Atlantic: Slavery, Abolition and Emancipation. London: 
Pluto Press, 2011. Accessed May 17, 2021. doi:10.2307/j.ctt183p3kr. 
35
 Dutch Slavery Exhibition Confronts Brutal Past, available at: 
 https://www.google.com/amp/s/news.yahoo.com/amphtml/dutch-slavery-exhibition-confronts-brutal-
174641161.html. The Rijksmuseum has also embarked on a research program called ‘Provenance Research on 
Objects of the Colonial Era’ from 2019-2021 currently focusing on Indonesia and Sri Lanka: 
 https://www.rijksmuseum.nl/en/research/our-research/overarching/provenance-research-colonial-collections.  
36
 Paul Coslett, Liverpool’s Slavery Apology, BBC, 1999, available at: 
 http://www.bbc.co.uk/liverpool/content/articles/2007/02/15/abolition_liverpool_apology_feature.shtml.  
Likewise, the Mexican president has recently apologized in 2021 for historical atrocities against the Mayan 
indigenous communities amounting to wage slavery in the hands of the Mexican state and its colonial predecessors: 
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/5/4/terrible-abuse-mexico-apologises-to-indigenous-maya.  
37
 See Eline Schaart, Dutch PM Rejects Coalition Parties’ Call for Formal Apology for Slave Trade History, 
Politico, 31 May 2020, available at: 
https://www.politico.eu/article/dutch-coalition-parties-call-for-formal-apology-for-slave-trade-history/.   
38
 See Nimako & Willemsen, supra note 34, at 182. However, two years earlier before this statement, the Dutch 
Prime Minister was widely criticised for seemingly praising the East-Indian Company (Vereenigde Nederlandsche 
Oost Indische Compagnie). This trading company was the first public limited agency with freely tradable shares 
in the world hosting offices in several countries. It was admired by Balkenende supposedly for its commercial 
spirit and decisiveness. 
 9
