offensive remarks are only punishable by Dutch law if they equate to discrimination against a 
39
particular group.  
 
2.2 Competences of the Kingdom of the Netherlands (scope of the rijkswet) 
 
In case the Motie Nicolaï leads to a legislative response from parliament, the question emerges 
on whether such a regulation recognising slavery and slave trade as a crime against humanity 
is to be adopted as a rijkswet applicable to the Kingdom of the Netherlands as a whole or rather 
as a regular law only applicable to the Netherlands.  
 
The Koninkrijk der Nederlanden currently consists of four autonomous countries (landen), 
namely the Netherlands, Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten, with the latter three located in the 
Caribbean. The country of the Netherlands, in contrast, consists of a territory in Europe and the 
islands of Bonaire, Saba and St. Eustatius, also located in the Caribbean. Both the Kingdom of 
the Netherlands and the Netherlands as such, therefore, comprise a European and a Caribbean 
part.  
 
From the analysis of the Charter of the Kingdom of the Netherlands (Statuut voor het Koninkrijk 
der Nederlanden, 1954), regulating the status of the Kingdom, the Kingdom of the Netherlands 
can be considered a State (staat). Only the Kingdom – not its individual autonomous countries 
(landen) or the public bodies – possesses international legal personality. The Constitution of 
the Kingdom of the Netherlands (Grondwet voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden) along with 
the Basic Laws of the three other countries are legally subordinate to the Charter. The 1954 
Charter of the Kingdom of the Netherlands is the overarching legal instrument for the Kingdom 
as a whole, prescribing the division of competencies and specifying the areas of internal 
competences for each of the autonomous countries. In this regard, all areas are considered to be 
internal competences of each of the autonomous countries unless the Charter explicitly states 
otherwise. Each of the autonomous countries has the obligation to promote the realisation of 
fundamental rights and freedoms, legal certainty and good governance; this is primarily their 
own, autonomous responsibility. However, the safeguarding of such rights and freedoms, legal 
certainty and good governance is deemed a ‘Kingdom affair’. As a consequence, the Kingdom 
can respond if an autonomous country fails to fulfil its duty adequately in this field. Whether 
this is the case is primarily to be assessed by the Council of Ministers of the Kingdom. 
 
Article 3 (1) of the Charter envisages that without prejudice to what is stipulated elsewhere in 
the Charter, matters of the Kingdom comprise: 
 
a. maintaining the independence and defence of the Kingdom; 
b. foreign relations; 
c. Dutch citizenship; 
d. the regulation of the orders of chivalry, as well as of the flag and coat of arms 
of the Kingdom; 
e. the regulation of the nationality of ships and the setting of requirements with 
regard to the safety and navigation of sea-going vessels flying the flag of the 
Kingdom, with the exception of sailing ships; 
f. supervising the general rules regarding the admission and expulsion of Dutch 
nationals; 
g. setting general conditions for the admission and expulsion of aliens; 
 
39
 For a broader analysis of this specific issue, see Marloes van Noorloos, Hate Speech Revisited: A Comparative 
and Historical Perspective on Hate Speech in the Netherlands and in England & Wales, Intersentia, 2011. 
 10
