bijlage 4b
 
  
40
h. the extradition. 
 
As explained above, one additional Kingdom Affair is the safeguarding of fundamental human 
rights and freedoms, legal certainty and good governance (Article 43(2) of the Charter). From 
this enumeration in the Statuut voor het Koninkrijk (points a to h in Article 3(1) and Article 
43), it appears unlikely that the type of legislation advanced in the Motie Nicolaï should be 
regulated as a Kingdom Act (Rijkswet). However, point 2 in Article 3 stipulates that “[o]ther 
subjects can be declared to be Kingdom affairs by mutual agreement” ([a]ndere onderwerpen 
41
kunnen in gemeen overleg tot aangelegenheden van het Koninkrijk worden verklaard). Article 
38 further confirms that the countries of the Kingdom can decide to adopt a Kingdom Act 
42
outside of the scope of the aforementioned areas. Such acts are referred to as Consensus 
Kingdom Acts (Consensusrijkswetten), in contrast with obligatory laws (sometimes referred to 
as obligatoire rijkswetten) within the competences of the aforementioned Articles 3(1) and 43 
of the Statute, as they require the consent of the parliaments of the Netherlands, Aruba, Curaçao 
43
and Sint Maarten. Hence, the countries of the Kingdom can agree to consider the slave past a 
subject of concern not just for the Netherlands but for the entire Kingdom, and thus a Kingdom 
affair to be regulated via a Rijkswet. Prima facie, the trans-Atlantic slave trade (also in the 
Caribbean) seems a topic par excellence that would fit that description. Yet it is up to the 
Advisory Board and the Parliament itself to assess whether there is a socio-political benefit in 
terms of adopting this legislation as a Rijkswet. This option seems to be viable only as a political 
choice, wherein the four autonomous countries discuss the matter and agree to advance this 
legislation in the form of a Consensusrijkswet.   
 
Should this option be exercised, the second sub-question in the Motie Nicolaï also becomes 
relevant, namely whether this same law [consensusrijkswet] should guarantee the establishment 
of a national monument, knowledge centre, and museum. It has not been entirely uncommon to 
prescribe historical representation in the public sphere (through street and building naming and 
re-naming, establishment of monuments, knowledge centers on the matters of history etc.) via 
state legislation, starting with post-revolutionary decrees in France that authorized  the creation 
44
of the Louvre in Paris. Furthermore, in the subsequent section of this study, it will be 
demonstrated how Poland has been administering such regulations through a quasi-
45
parliamentary institution, the Institute of National Remembrance. However, most regulations 
pertaining to the soft governance of historical memory by virtue of administrative acts are 
 
40
 Translated into English from Statuut voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden, available in Dutch at: 
https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0002154/2017-11-17.  
41
 Ibid. 
42
 Article 38 of the Charter of the Kingdom of the Netherlands provides as follows [in the original Dutch version]: 
1. Nederland, Aruba, Curaçao en Sint Maarten kunnen onderling regelingen treffen. 2 In onderling overleg kan 
worden bepaald, dat zodanige regeling en de wijziging daarvan bij rijkswet of algemene maatregel van 
rijksbestuur wordt vastgesteld. 3. Omtrent privaatrechtelijke en strafrechtelijke onderwerpen van interregionale 
of internationale aard kunnen bij rijkswet regelen worden gesteld, indien omtrent deze regelen overeenstemming 
tussen de regeringen der betrokken landen bestaat (see supra note 38).  
43
 See Naima Qoubbane, Over de totstandkoming van consensusrijkswetten: overeenstemming tussen wie en 
waarover?, Tijdschrift voor Constitutioneel Recht, 2010. 146-164; Gregory Aubrich Haëzer Bakhuis, Autonomie, 
toezicht en interventie in de Caribische landen van het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden, PhD dissertation Erasmus 
Universiteit Rotterdam, 2020. 191-199. 
44
 Uladzislau Belavusau, Memory Laws and Freedom of Speech: Governance of History in European Law in 
András Koltay (ed.), Comparative Perspectives on the Fundamental Freedom of Expression, Wolters Kluwer, 
2015. 537-558. 
45
 See also Anna Wójcik & Uladzislau Belavusau, Renaming Streets: A Key Element of Identity Politics, New 
Eastern Europe (26 April 2018); Uladzislau Belavusau and Anna Wójcik, “Posponer los cambios de nombre de 
las calles tras la transición a la democracia: lecciones legales de Polonia”, in Jordi Guixé et al. (eds,), Diez años 
de leyes y políticas de memoria (2007-2017), Ediciones La Catarata. 27-39. 
 11
