bijlage 4b
 
  
Overall, it can be concluded that a law specifically recognizing slavery as a crime against 
humanity is in adherence with the national and international legal approach to enslavement. 
However, the prescription of slavery in the Rome Statute as a crime against humanity is  
aimed at the future, to enable the prosecution of individuals. The possible law in the 
Netherlands, and it seems that would also be the case for the Taubira law (discussed in 
detailed in the subsequent section 4.1.), in contrast, is not about criminalizing future 
behaviour, but about recognising a past practice, not for accountability of individuals 
purposes, but for taking responsibility as a state.   
3.2 The law of the Council of Europe (with an emphasis on the case law of the ECtHR) 
 
In the field of the legal governance of history, the Council of Europe has primarily dealt with 
matters of genocide denial rather than colonial history. While the Motie Nicolaï does not 
suggest adopting a provision criminalising the denial of the colonial slave trade, the Netherlands 
is directly bound to the law of the Council of Europe and it is therefore imperative to consider 
its compatibility with the legislation at stake in the Motie Nicolaï. A potential memory law 
labelling slavery and the slave trade as a crime against humanity could be the basis for a 
subsequent law criminalizing its denial. Seemingly (as will be demonstrated in the country 
study on France in section 4.1), there have been attempts to interpret the Taubira law as 
empowering the prohibition of colonialism denial or trivialization in France. Similarly, 
Nicolaï’s Motie could lay down the basis for a law that goes further and criminalises denial, as 
a seemingly declaratory law may be argued to be ‘toothless’ by those who advocate a stronger 
version of memory justice, based on punitive measures against the apologists of colonisation. 
Hence, it is good for the Advisory Board to realise that the suggested law may not be the end 
of a certain chapter in Dutch legislative history, but in fact the beginning or the basis of more 
(and further-going) laws, including ones criminalising denial. And of course, in that case, it is 
crucial to understand what international and European law say about these latter laws. It should 
be noted that the ‘denialist’ paradigm in the law of the Council of Europe, with its powerful 
European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), has mainly dealt with Holocaust denial.  
 
In this respect, the legal core of the position on Holocaust denial in the Council of Europe (CoE) 
71
stems from the Declaration of the Stockholm International Forum on the Holocaust (2000) 
where states agreed to institute educational programmes and national commemorative 
initiatives. This Declaration was followed by the European Parliament Resolution on 
72
Remembrance of the Holocaust, Anti-Semitism and Racism (2005).  
 
In March 2007, the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia was reconstituted 
into the newly formed EU Agency for Fundamental Rights. This organization came up with the 
Working Definition of Anti-Semitism which was intended as a road map for criminal justice 
73
tribunals. The Working Definition, in particular, identifies anti-Semitic acts of denying the 
 
71
 See Declaration of the Stockholm International Forum on the Holocaust (2000), available at: 
 https://www.holocaustremembrance.com/sites/default/files/stockholm_4csilver.pdf.   
72
 European Parliament Resolution on Remembrance of the Holocaust, Anti-Semitism and Racism (2005), 
P6_TA(2005)0018, available at: 
 https://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//TEXT+TA+P6-TA-2005-
0018+0+DOC+XML+V0//EN.   
73
 The document states as follows: ‘Antisemitism is a certain perception of Jews, which may be expressed as hatred 
toward Jews. Rhetorical and physical manifestations of antisemitism are directed toward Jewish or non-Jewish 
individuals and / or their property, toward Jewish community institutions and religious facilities.’ This ‘working 
definition’ was adopted in 2005 by the EUMC, now called the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights 
 15
