bijlage 4b
 
  
 From the analysis of the jurisprudence of the ECtHR, it appears, therefore, that a memory law 
prescribing a criminal punishment for the denial or trivialization of colonial atrocities, such as 
slave trade, will be considered as disproportionately violating freedom of speech. However, a 
non-punitive memory law with a declaratory core about slavery qualified as a crime against 
humanity, such as seemingly suggested in the Motie Nicolaï, should not be problematic from 
the standpoint of the ECHR.  
 
3.3 The law of the European Union  
 
The Maastricht Treaty (1992) reinforced the discourse of peace and post-World-War-II trauma 
as a foundational basis for EU competences in fundamental rights and the project of EU 
90
citizenship, both since formalised as primary law. Likewise, the soft law of the Union has 
shaped a strong legal invitation to remember via various resolutions of the Parliament and 
91
Commission. Those legal initiatives often build on the narrative of the Holocaust as 
foundational for the politics of memory in the EU. They address episteme of the common 
memory of EU citizens as a new specific element of pan-European identity, whose symbolical 
core is founded on the ethical lessons of World War II. In fostering a European demos, EU 
institutions have been capitalising on the moral commitment to the past as a promise of a better 
future. Central to this vision of EU citizenship and its core values has been the Europe for 
Citizens Programme launched in December 2006 by Decision 1904/2006/EC of the European 
92
Parliament and of the Council. The Programme, initially established for the period from 2007 
to 2013, was in itself an extensive transnational memory law supporting a series of activities 
and organisations that promoted ‘Active European Citizenship’. The programme has made a 
significant contribution in fostering European integration and in ‘developing a sense of 
common identity among European citizens based on recognised common values, history and 
culture’. Furthermore, one of the Programme’s four action lines is explicitly devoted to ‘Active 
93
European Remembrance’. In the subsequent Europe for Citizens Programme 2014–2020, the 
‘European remembrance’ of totalitarianism was further reinforced with increased funds going 
towards action in this area, available for various research institutes, associations of survivors, 
museums, and organisations active in the promotion of human rights, as well as in the creation 
of additional channels of communication across the EU by networking organisations which 
94
were formerly only active at the domestic level.  
 
However, recent developments in EU law indicate a substantial evolution of the activist 
citizenship discourse on historic memory, from an invitation to remember (which resembles the 
95
wording of the Motie Nicolaï) towards a duty to remember. This paradigm of memory-
 
90
 See Christian Joerges and Navraj Singh Ghaleigh (eds), Darker Legacies of Law in Europe: The Shadow of 
National Socialism and Fascism over Europe and its Legal Traditions, Hart, 2003. See also Stijn Smismans, The 
European Union’s Fundamental Rights Myth, Journal of Common Market Studies, 48, 1 2010. 45–66.  
91
 E.g. European Parliament Resolution of 23 October 2008 on the Commemoration of the Holodomor, the Ukraine 
artificial Famine (1932–1933), Official Journal of the European Union, 21 January 2010, C 15 E/78; European 
Parliament Resolution of 2 April 2009 on European Conscience and Totalitarianism; Resolution on the 
Remembrance of the Holocaust, Anti-Semitism and Racism 2005; Resolution on a Political Solution of the 
Armenian Question, Doc A2-33/87.  
92
 A detailed description of the programme is available on the webpage of the EU Commission: 
http://eacea.ec.europa.eu/citizenship/index_en.php. 
93
 Action 4 ‘Active European Remembrance’,  
see <http://eacea.ec.europa.eu/citizenship/programme/action4_en.php>. 
94
 Annabelle Littoz-Monnet, ‘The EU Politics of Remembrance: Can Europeans Remember Together?’, 35,5 West 
European Politics, 2012. 1182–202.  
95
 Emanuela Fronza, ‘The Punishment of Negationism: The Difficult Dialogue between Law and Memory’ 30 
Vermont Law Review 2006. 609–26. 
 18
