interpretations of the concrete clauses, leading to the poor transposition of the instrument into 
103
the legislation of the EU Member States.  
The formulation of the Framework Decision covers not only incitement to violence but also the 
104
very expression of hatred. Other grounds for criminalisation are the expression of historical 
revisionism, since the punishable conduct includes:  
 
(1) Publicly condoning, denying or grossly trivialising crimes of genocide, crimes 
against humanity and war crimes as defined in Articles 6, 7 and 8 of the Statute of the 
International Criminal Court, directed against a group of persons or a member of such 
a group defined by reference to race, colour, religion, descent or national or ethnic origin 
when the conduct is carried out in a manner likely to incite to violence or hatred against 
such a group or a member of such a group;  
(2) Publicly condoning, denying or grossly trivialising the crimes defined in Article 6 
of the Charter of the International Military Tribunal appended to the London Agreement 
of 8 August 1945, directed against a group of persons or a member of such a group 
defined by reference to race, colour, religion, descent or national or ethnic origin when 
the conduct is carried out in a manner likely to incite to violence or hatred against such 
a group or a member of such a group.  
 
In the absence of specification by the Court of Justice of the European Union of what constitutes 
‘the conduct carried out in a manner likely to incite to violence or hatred against such a group’, 
it remains difficult to assess the potential of the severe and unequivocal criminalisation of 
historical revisionism in the EU. What is striking on the surface is the extremely broad scope 
of the criminalised offence. Although the Directive clearly maintains that it does not require 
105
States to take measures that contravene the fundamental right to freedom of expression, the 
yardstick of the compatibility with freedom of expression is unclear. The only reasonable 
assessment solution in the situation of a potential clash seems to be the analysis of the case law 
of the ECtHR on Article 10 of the ECHR (freedom of expression).  
  
4. Relevant country studies  
  
4.1 Memory laws in France 
 
The current popular terminology of memory laws amongst scholars originates from the French 
lois mémorielles (literally ‘memorial laws’) and was devised by French historians who were 
protesting the increasing number of measures that forced them to consider the past through a 
specific lens. Memory laws were, thus, first publicly discussed in a December Le Monde 
106
magazine in 2005.  
 
At the time of their inception, four provisions were labelled as lois mémorielles. Firstly, the 
107
1990 ‘loi Gayssot’ introduced a prohibition on the contestation of crimes against humanity. 
It should be mentioned that laws similar to this one – targeting essentially Holocaust denial in 
the epoch –  mushroomed in the 1980s and 1990s in Europe, spreading beyond Germany and 
 
103
 For similar conclusions on the over-broadness of the Decision, see John C Knechtle, ‘Holocaust Denial and the 
Concept of Dignity in the European Union’ Florida State University Law Review, 2008, 36.41–65.  
104
 Article 1(a) Framework Decision (2008): ‘[Each Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that 
the following conduct is punishable:] publicly inciting to violence or hatred directed against a group of persons or 
a member of such a group defined by reference to race, colour, religion, descent or national or ethnic origin.’  
105
 Article 7 Framework Decision (2008).  
106
 Chandernagor, ‘L’enfer des bonnes intentions’ Le Monde (Paris, 16 December 2005).  
107
 Loi n° 90-615 du 13 juillet 1990 tendant à réprimer tout acte raciste, antisémite ou xenophobe.  
 20
