bijlage 4b
 
  
108
across the continent by the end of the millennium. Essentially the paradigm of such laws has 
been confirmed via the prohibition on genocide denialism in the secondary law of the European 
Union by virtue of the Framework Decision on xenophobic speech, addressed in the previous 
section of this study. 
 
The second and third French laws established as lois mémorielles were declaratory rather than 
109
criminal in nature. The 2001 ‘loi Arménie’ recognized the Armenian genocide. The ‘loi 
Taubira’ (adopted in 2001 as well and mentioned as the major relevant protagonist in the Dutch 
Motie Nicolaï), recognised slavery and the transatlantic slave trade as constituting a crime 
110
against humanity. Finally, the French set of lois mémorielles concluded with the ‘loi 
Rapatrié’, a now defunct law that required schools to teach about the positive aspects of French 
111
colonialism (especially in North Africa).  
 
The initial academic examination of French lois mémorielles focused on their impact on the 
freedom of historical research, and was carried out mainly by historians who considered 
themselves affected by these measures. Local historian organizations have also had significant 
influence on the French public opinion on memory laws. Through tenacious lobbying, they 
have managed to convince the French parliament that the lack of clarity with which the four 
lois mémorielles had been introduced represents a serious threat to academic freedom of 
expression. As a result, in 2008, the French parliament ordered a comprehensive review of 
French memory laws, leading to the term becoming mired in controversy. Nowadays, when 
French legislators attempt to adopt similar laws, they tend to make specific efforts to prove that 
they are not, in fact, enacting memory laws per se – even if the content of the prospective 
measure aligns perfectly with previous lois mémorielles. As the French debate on memory laws 
evolved, it was reoriented towards the potential impact of criminalizing the denial of the 
Armenian genocide (and potentially other genocides), and the issue of equal treatment between 
112
that tragedy and the Holocaust.  
 
The 2008 French bill on the criminalisation of the Armenian genocide denial was drafted as an 
initiative ‘transposing EU anti-racist law in national legislation’, i.e. the Council Framework 
113
Decision, detailed in the previous section of this study. Completely ignoring the issue of EU 
harmonisation in criminal law, the French Conseil Constitutionnel struck the law as per se 
114
contradictory to the constitutional protection of freedom of expression.  
 
108
 Emanuela Fronza, Memory and Punishment: Historical Denialism, Free Speech and the Limits of Criminal 
Law, Springer, 2018. 
109
 Loi du 29 janvier 2001 relative à la reconnaissance du génocide arménien de 1915. 
110
 Loi du 21 mai 2001 tendant à la reconnaissance de la traite et de l’esclavage en tant que crime contre l’humanité.  
111
 Loi du 23 février 2005 portant reconnaissance de la nation et contribution nationale en faveur des Français 
rapatriés [also known as 2005 Mekachera Act that “acknowledges the sufferings and sacrifices” of the “civil and 
military victims” of the Algerian war on the French side]. These four statutes are viewed as canonical memory 
laws. See, in particular, Nikolay Koposov, Memory Law and Memory Wars, CUP, 2017. 3.  
112
 Vincent Duclert, Faut-il une loi contre le négationnisme du génocide des Arméniens? Un raisonnement historien 
sur le tournant de 2012, Histoire & Politique vol 2. n° 2 (2013). 
113
 La Proposition de loi portant transposition du droit communautaire sur la lutte contre le racisme et réprimant la 
contestation de l’existence du génocide arménien, 18 October 2011, no 3842.  
114
 ‘Considering that a legislative provision having the objective of “recognising” a crime of genocide would not 
itself have the normative scope which is characteristic of the law; that nonetheless, Article 1 of the law referred to 
punishes the denial or minimisation of the existence of one or more crimes of “genocide recognised as such under 
French law”; that in thereby punishing the denial of the existence and the legal classification of crimes which 
Parliament itself has recognised and classified as such, Parliament has imposed an unconstitutional limitation on 
the exercise of freedom of expression and communication; that accordingly, without any requirement to examine 
the other grounds for challenge, Article 1 of the law referred to must be ruled unconstitutional’ (Décision du 
Conseil Constitutionnel, no 2012-647 DC du 28 février 2012, para 6).  
 21
