The aforementioned Taubira law, referred to in the Motie Nicolaï, was adopted by the French 
115
Parliament in May 2001. It is commonly named after the socialist MP Christiane Taubira. 
This act recognized ‘both the transatlantic and Indian Ocean slave trade [traite négrière 
transatlantique ainsi que la traite dans l'océan Indien], on the one hand, and slavery itself, on 
th
the other, that were practiced from the 15 century […] as constituting crimes against humanity’ 
116
(its Article 1). The law also instituted the commemoration of slavery’s victims and stipulated 
that ‘school curricula and research projects in the fields of history and humanities will accord 
to the subjects of the Negro slave trade and slavery the important place they deserve’ (Article 
2). Furthermore, the Taubira law encouraged the establishment of an institute dedicated to the 
preservation of memory of colonialism in France. In 2009, the Comité pour la mémoire et 
l’histoire de l’esclavage (Committee for the Memory and History of Slavery) was founded. The 
committee’s role is essentially supporting the government in the regulation of research, 
dissemination and teaching regarding colonial past, advancing recommendations on the 
dedication of remembrance days and commemorative events, identifying places of memory and 
connecting them to an international cooperative network, along with raising awareness about 
colonial history in French schools. The government can also require the committee to provide 
117
professional advice related to the legal governance of slavery’s remembrance. The reading 
of the travaux préparatoires for the Taubira law reveal that in its initial proposal it also 
contained Article 5, repealed by the French Senate. The Senators deleted this draft provision, 
which enabled the associations defending the memory of slaves and the honor of their 
descendants to exercise the rights recognized to the civil party in the event of insult or racist 
discrimination. The Senate considered that the then-current provisions of Article 48-1 of the 
French Press Law, which gave this possibility to associations proposing to combat racism or to 
118
assist victims of racial discrimination, were sufficient. This element may also be of interest 
to the Advisory Board, as proceedings based on group defamation in the Netherlands are 
119
regulated by virtue of Article 137 (d) in the Dutch Criminal Code. Hence, technically there 
is no need in further legislation on this specific aspect.  
 
 
115
 For travaux préparatoires leading to the adoption of this legislation, see https://www.assemblee-
nationale.fr/11/dossiers/esclavage.asp.  
116
 For the full current version, see https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/loda/id/LEGITEXT000005630984/.  
117
 See the webpage of the Comité: www.cnmhe.fr. The full version of the law is rather short, comprising three 
major provisions as follows: « [Article 1] La République française reconnaît que la traite négrière transatlantique 
ainsi que la traite dans l'océan Indien d'une part, et l'esclavage d'autre part, perpétrés à partir du xve siècle, aux 
Amériques et aux Caraïbes, dans l'océan Indien et en Europe contre les populations africaines, amérindiennes, 
malgaches et indiennes constituent un crime contre l'humanité. [Article 2] Les programmes scolaires et les 
programmes de recherche en histoire et en sciences humaines accorderont à la traite négrière et à l'esclavage la 
place conséquente qu'ils méritent. La coopération qui permettra de mettre en articulation les archives écrites 
disponibles en Europe avec les sources orales et les connaissances archéologiques accumulées en Afrique, dans 
les Amériques, aux Caraïbes et dans tous les autres territoires ayant connu l'esclavage sera encouragée et 
favorisée. [Article 3] Une requête en reconnaissance de la traite négrière transatlantique ainsi que de la traite 
dans l'océan Indien et de l'esclavage comme crime contre l'humanité sera introduite auprès du Conseil de 
l'Europe, des organisations internationales et de l'Organisation des Nations unies. Cette requête visera également 
la recherche d'une date commune au plan international pour commémorer l'abolition de la traite négrière et de 
l'esclavage, sans préjudice des dates commémoratives propres à chacun des départements d'outre-mer”.  
118
 See travaux préparatoires, available at : https://www.assemblee-nationale.fr/11/dossiers/esclavage.asp, in 
particular, the Report of Christiane Taubira-Delannon, number 2320 (6 April 2000), available at : 
https://www.assemblee-nationale.fr/11/rapports/r2320.asp.    
119
 For more about this aspect, see Tom Herrenberg, Group Defamation and Incitement in the Netherlands: the 
Conviction of Geert Wilders, Columbia Journal of European Law, 6 February 2017, available at: 
http://blogs2.law.columbia.edu/cjel/preliminary-reference/2017/group-defamation-and-incitement-in-the-
netherlands-the-conviction-of-geert-wilders/.   
 22
