bijlage 4b
 
  
The Taubira law has inspired several subsequent unsuccessful attempts to criminalize the denial 
of the slave trade, along with the denial of the Armenian genocide. However, there has also 
been legislation at the opposite end of the colonial memory spectrum. The aforementioned ‘loi 
Rapatrié’/ Mekachera Act (2005) contrasts the Taubira law and its self-inculpatory character 
by expressing the opposite self-exculpatory narrative. It is intended to protect the memory of 
the harkis, i.e. French nationals living in Algeria who were repatriated to France along with 
auxiliaries of the French army. Unlike the Taubira law, the Mekachera Act does not mention 
any crimes committed by the French in Northern Africa before or during the Algerian war but 
instead makes several references to the crimes of Algerians and stops short of classifying them 
as crimes against humanity.  
 
While few French historians resisted the Gayssot Act in 1990 (essentially establishing a ban on 
Holocaust denial), a wave of contestation emerged against the Mekachera Act 2005, in 
particular, against the clause stipulating the ‘positive effects’ of French colonialism. In May 
2005, Le Monde published a petition signed by a thousand historians who called for the 
120
abrogation of this provision and against the trend on imposing the ‘official history’. This is 
a relevant point to take into account for the Advisory Board as well with regard to the Motie. 
How will the ‘Nicolaï qualification’ be possibly perceived by Dutch historians? In this regard, 
the Board may wish to reach Dutch historians to check whether they see pitfalls in qualifying 
121
slavery and the slave trade as crimes against humanity.   
 
Almost immediately, in June 2005, the author of a renowned study on slave trade, French 
historian Olivier Pétré-Grenouilleau, gave an interview where he noted, in particular, the 
following: ‘The Negro slave trade [la traite négrière] was not a genocide. The goal of the slave 
trade was not to exterminate a people […] The genocide of the Jews and the Negro slave trade 
122
were two different processes’. Although the historian denied neither the scale of the slave 
trade nor its inhumane character, a group of activists (the Collectif des Antillais, Guyanais, 
Réunionnais), supported by Christiane Taubira herself, accused Pétré-Grenouilleau of denying 
a crime against humanity (essentially confusing notions of genocide and crime against 
123
humanity as international legal categories), citing the Gayssot Act and the Taubira Act in 
conjunction. Furthermore, the Collectif started criminal and civil lawsuits against the historian 
and even demanded his suspension from teaching as a ‘revisionist’. These developments around 
the 2001 and 2005 memory laws have led to the remarkable mobilization of historians, under 
 
120
 “Colonisation: Non à l’enseignement d’une histoire officielle,” Le Monde, 24 March 2005.  
121
 In this regard, one of the major authorities in the Dutch academia on the issues of memory laws amongst 
historians (also engaged in mobilisation against censorship of history) is Prof. Antoon de Baets, holding a chair in 
History, Ethics and Human Rights by Special Appointment of the Foundation Euroclio at the University of 
Groningen. Since 1995, he has also been the founder and coordinator of the Network for Concerned Historians 
(concernedhistorians.org). 
122
 Quoted in Nikolay Koposov, Memory Law and Memory Wars, Cambridge University Press, 2017. 120.  
123
 It should be noted that in Accordance with the UN Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of genocide, 
genocide means any of the following acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, 
racial or religious group, as such:  
a. Killing members of the group;  
b. Causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of the group; 
c. Deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in 
whole or in part;  
d. Imposing measures intended to prevent births within the group; 
e. Forcibly transferring children of the group to another group.  
See e.g. here https://www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/genocide.shtml. In this sense, it is certainly different from 
the slave trade as another category of crime. 
 23
