124
the framework of the Liberté pour l’histoire petition (2005). Partially under their pressure, 
the undesirable clause of the Mekachera law was repealed, the Collectif withdrew its complaint 
against Pétré-Grenouilleau, which probably saved the Taubira act from being repealed by the 
constitutional tribunal. The historians from the Liberté pour l’histoire have further protested 
against the adoption of the EU Framework Decision, scrutinized in the previous part of this 
study. They have published a manifesto ‘Blois Appeal’, signed by a number of the world’s 
125
leading historians such as Carlo Ginzburg, Eric Hobsbawm, and Jacques Le Goff. Notably, 
the Appel de Blois protested not only criminalization of the public discourse about the past but 
equally a government’s right to articulate its official assessment of historical events through 
declarative memory laws for their chilling effect. The document sought to present the halting 
126
of all attempts to legislate on the past.  
 
Apart from the reasons advanced in the context of the Pétré-Grenouilleau’s affair, the wording 
of the Taubira Act was criticized for failing to acknowledge that trade of African slaves was 
not exclusively a European business, but substantially also a commerce perpetrated in the epoch 
by the Arabs and broader Muslim populations. By stigmatizing the slavery and trafficking 
practiced by all Europeans and them alone, the Taubira law essentially racialised the 
127
phenomenon and reduced it to an opposition between whites and blacks in Europe. The 
Advisory Board may wish to take this aspect of the criticism addressed towards the Taubira law 
into account in the Dutch context too,. Furthermore, a famous French historian, Pierre Nora, 
emphasised in the context of the Taubira law the danger of anachronism, that is of applying the 
concept of a crime against humanity to past events according to contemporary criteria, since 
the perpetrators of those crimes have passed away long ago and, therefore, do not bear any risk 
of being prosecuted unlike the historians who refer to these events in terms that are not 
128
permitted by law. Pierre Vidal-Naquet further questioned, “whether the Greeks of today 
should decree that their ancestors, the Hellenes, committed a crime against humanity because 
129
they had slaves? That does not make sense”.  
 
While the Motie Nicolaï alludes to the assumingly positive outcome of the Taubira Act in 
France, the legacy of this legislative act – as has been demonstrated – remains extremely 
controversial. The law appears to bring a serious constraint on freedom of (in particular, 
academic) expression into the socio-political reality in France, manifested in the mobilization 
of historians against the censorship of their research and public standards. In terms of rule of 
law, the Act is still capable of compromising certainty on what is permissible in the realm of 
130
academic expression regarding colonial history. While the French approach to the legal 
governance of historical memory may be characterized as both self-inculpatory and self-
exculpatory, the legal governance of historical memory in France highlights the shortcomings 
of the self-inculpatory approach. The positive side of the French legislation is a serious 
 
124
 “Liberté pour l’histoire: Une petition pour l’abrogation des articles de loi contraignant la recherche et 
l’enseignement de cette discipline”, Libération, 13 December 2005. 
125
 “Appel de Blois”, Le Monde, 10 October 2008.   
126
 Nikolay Koposov, Memory Law and Memory Wars, CUP, 2017. 120. 
127
 André Larané, Mai 2011 – Juin 2020, La traite, un crime contre l’humanité?, 11 February 2020, available at: 
https://www.herodote.net/La_traite_un_crime_contre_l_humanite_-article-17.php.    
128
 Cited from Patrick Weil, Politique de la mémoire : l’interdit et la commémoration, Espirit, 332, 2, 2007. 124-
142.  
129
 “ Est-ce que les Grecs d'aujourd'hui vont décréter que leurs ancêtres les Hellènes commettaient un crime contre 
l'humanité car ils avaient des esclaves ? Cela n'a pas de sens ” (Pierre Vidal-Naquet in Le Monde, 17 décembre 
2005).   
130
 For a detailed discussion, see Ioanna Tourkochoriti, “Challenging Historical Facts and National Truths: An 
Analysis of Cases from France and Greece”, in Uladzislau Belavusau & Aleksandra Gliszczyńska-Grabias, Law 
and Memory: Towards Legal Governance of History, Cambridge University Press, 2007. 151-174. 
 24
