legal reasoning developed by the Polish Constitutional Tribunal was far from convincing and, 
149
regrettably, did not include a critique on substantive grounds.  
 
On 27 June 2018, unexpectedly for many and even before a decision of the Constitutional 
Tribunal was issued, the Polish parliament amended the 2018 Law by repealing Articles 55a 
and 55b which had been introduced in the January 2018 Amendment (June 2018 
150
Amendment). These Articles comprised a criminal offence for insulting the Polish State or 
nation through falsely alleging responsibility or co-responsibility for the atrocities of World 
War II committed by Nazi Germany. Thus, this crime existed in the Polish legal system only 
for four months from March up to and including June 2018. Other provisions introduced in 
January 2018, however, remain in force, including Article 1.1a, which relates to Polish-
Ukrainian history, and Articles 53o, 53p and 53q, which introduce a civil liability system for 
the infringement of personal rights of the Republic of Poland and the Polish nation.  
 
The argument of the Polish government that all Western European countries have been legally 
protecting the memory of the Holocaust in the same way is at best misleading. The closest 
relative of the 2018 Law is not a standard provision in continental Europe’s criminal codes 
about punitive measures against Holocaust deniers. Rather, the closest sibling of the Law are 
parts of the Turkish and Russian penal codes. The way the Law frames the defence of collective 
Polish dignity in a historical context is foremost reminiscent of the notorious provision in the 
Turkish criminal code (Article 301), which criminalises denigration of the Turkish nation and 
is particularly used to silence people speaking out against the massacres of Armenians and other 
minorities by the Ottoman Empire in 1915. Likewise, the provision is similar to Putin’s policy 
of rehabilitating Stalinism, namely Article 354.1, which was introduced into the Criminal Code 
in 2014 by the Russian Duma. The Article imposes a maximum of three years of imprisonment 
(a similar term as in the initial winter version of the 2018 Law) to people ‘publicly spreading 
false information about USSR’s activities during World War II’. By implementing the 2018 
Law, Poland has confirmed the downslide of its liberal democracy. During the past three years, 
the Polish government has been at the epicentre of criticism from the EU and has had to face 
overwhelming external criticism regarding the dismantling of its independent Constitutional 
151
Tribunal and its increasing political control of the judiciary. 
 
The Polish memory laws, thus, include a variety of state acts regulating remembrance of 
historical events, persons (both proclaimed victims and heroes), social movements, national 
and foreign authorities and organizations. The country study is further characterized by an 
impressive quasi-parliamentary body, the already-mentioned Institute of National 
Remembrance that has been particularly active in drafting, promoting and implementing 
myriads of memory laws in the last 10 years. The scope of Polish memory laws covers the inter-
war period, history of World War II, the Nazi and communist regimes, and the crimes 
committed by “Ukrainian nationalists”. The nomenclature of such laws includes state and 
administrative provisions on the teaching of history, street (re-)naming, monuments, status of 
the veterans, commemoration of the Holocaust, etc., thus ranging also from declarative (non-
punitive) to punitive laws (with a criminal aspect). While the criminal sanctions in the 2018 
Memory Law were later repealed after the pressure from Israel and elsewhere amongst Western 
 
149
 Aleksandra Gliszczyńska and Anna Śledzińska-Simon, ‘Victimhood of the Nation as a Legally Protected Value 
in Transitional States – Poland as a Case Study’, Wrocław Review of Law, Administration & Economics, 6, 2, 
2018. 46-51. 
150
 The Law of 27 June 2018 amending the Law on the Institute of National Remembrance. Journal of Laws of the 
Republic of Poland 2017 item 1277. 
151
 Wojciech Sadurski, Poland’s Constitutional Breakdown, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019.  
 28
