bijlage 4b
 
  
democracies, the law itself remains enacted and has brought serious constraints on academic 
expression in Poland. Recently, Polish authorities have utilised the criminal provisions 
regarding defamation against Holocaust scholars. On 9 February 2021, the District Court in 
Warsaw ruled that two prominent Holocaust researchers must publicly apologize for statements 
published in a book about the extermination of Jews in Nazi Germany-occupied Poland during 
the Second World War. Professor Jan Grabowski of the University of Ottawa and Professor 
Barbara Engelking, the latter of whom heads the Polish Center for Holocaust Research of the 
Polish Academy of Sciences, were sued in a personal rights infringement case for stating within 
the book that mayor Edward Malinowski was partially responsible for the death of Jews in 
152
Malinowo in 1943 and that he robbed a Jewish woman of her possessions.  
 
The Polish example exposes the dangers of outsourcing legislation on historical memory to the 
specific non-parliamentary institution. Likewise, it reveals the censorship within memory laws, 
even when they carry a declaratory role, and highlights the particular dangers for fundamental 
rights and the rule of law (in terms of the protection of equality, legal certainty and national 
minorities) stemming from punitive memory laws. Unlike the French case, however, the Polish 
country study is largely characterized by self-exculpatory memory laws, that is legislative 
provisions that serve to exculpate (if not outright “white-wash”) the state and the titular nation 
from atrocities towards its minorities, unequivocally and exclusively attributing them to the 
totalitarian regimes imposed by foreign powers. Therefore, the Polish country study informs 
the recommendations with regard to the possible adoption of the Dutch memory law in terms 
of (1) the advice to withdraw from any self-exculpatory rhetoric in the legislation regarding 
colonial past (e.g., avoiding any glorification of colonial past or attribution of guilt to foreign 
subject); (2) the advice not to endow the possible knowledge center with regard to the Dutch 
colonial past with any legislative prerogatives; (3) the advice not to include any criminal or 
administrative sanctions for the denial of colonial crimes, keeping it purely declaratory and 
meant to acknowledge the memory of the victims of colonialism.  
 
5. Conclusions 
  
5.1 Recommendations to be considered when deciding whether a memory law should be 
introduced in the (Kingdom of the) Netherlands 
 
The country studies of France and Poland have demonstrated the contrasting pro’s and con’s 
of adopting a memory law in line with the Motie Nicolaï in the Netherlands. Beyond the Taubira 
law explicitly mentioned in the Motie, France has promulgated several other memory laws that 
have been both punitive and non-punitive, as well as self-inculpatory and self-exculpatory in 
153
their nature. The Taubira act itself is a non-punitive self-inculpatory memory law that was 
designed to deliver a genuine recognition of the injustices of the colonial past on behalf of the 
French Republic by acknowledging the slavery and the slave trade by French colonists as 
crimes against humanity. The law also prescribed a more symbolic basis for commemoration 
of slavery through the establishment of the Committee for the Memory and History of Slavery. 
In this respect, it is certainly a valuable tool to consider by the Advisory Board as a possible 
example of a similar legislation in the Netherlands. Likewise, Poland has been extremely 
prolific with both punitive and non-punitive memory laws in the recent years. The Polish 
engagement with memory laws does not concern matters of colonialism directly, considering 
different historic paths between France (which is somewhat closer to the Dutch experience in 
 
152
 Anna Wójcik, Historians on Trial, Verfassungsblog, 11 March 2021, 
 available at: https://verfassungsblog.de/historians-on-trial/.    
153
 For the explanation of the terminology, see section 1.3. in the present study.  
 29
