this respect) and Poland. Yet the richness of the legislative base in this field and the 
institutionalised character of legal governance of history in Poland certainly deliver parallel 
valuable lessons for the Netherlands, should it pursue the adoption of a memory law. Based on 
these two country studies as well as building on the constraints and obligations placed on the 
Dutch law from the standpoint of international and European law, this study draws the attention 
of the Advisory Board to several practical observations.   
 
5.1.1 Value and scope of the suggested legislation 
 
While assessing the desirability of adopting Dutch legislation mimicking the Taubira Law in 
France, the study reveals that a value in additional legislation in this area may be attributed 
rather to its scope, as the law will acknowledge that past trade in slaves constitutes a crime 
against humanity. Before advising on adopting or withdrawing from adopting a memory law in 
line with the Motie, the Board may decide to question what purpose such a memory law should 
serve and then whether such a law is the best way to serve that purpose. Thus, a further specific 
legal act in this area can be regarded as declaratory in its nature, meant to serve as a self-
inculpatory provision with a symbolic acknowledgement of the past injustice on behalf of the 
Dutch society for the historical wrongdoings of the colonialism. The significance of 
acknowledging past injustice is paramount to a scale of conflicts caused by repressed historical 
traumas that supposedly blossom through transgenerational transmission and cement a mutual 
misunderstanding amongst ethnic and racial groups. Therefore, whether such traumas should 
be addressed in a structural normative way via legal tools is not only a question regarding limits 
of free speech, but is also a vital dilemma in terms of paying respect to the dignity of certain 
groups of descendants of the victims of colonialism.  
 
It is up to the Board to conclude, based on this report and parallel studies, on whether a law 
mimicking the Taubira Law in France best meets this purpose. Other legal means, e.g. solemn 
declarations on behalf of the Netherlands, acknowledging Dutch colonial slave trade as crimes 
against humanity, may be a valid alternative.    
 
Furthermore, from the Motie Nicolaï, it remains unclear what colonial past of the Netherlands 
exactly is deemed to be viewed as crimes against humanity. The Motie does specify neither the 
concrete period of time, nor the exact geographic scope, for example, whether the colonial past 
should include the Dutch practice in both West and East Indies. Should such a legislation be 
given a green light from parliament, the bill must have a defined material (in particular, 
temporal and geographic) scope. In this respect, the Taubira law (2011) in France provides an 
example of a more specific provision. In its Article 1, it stipulates that the French Republic 
recognizes that the transatlantic slave trade as well as the slave trade in the Indian Ocean on the 
one hand, and slavery on the other hand, perpetrated from the fifteenth century, in the Americas 
and the Caribbean, in the Indian Ocean and in Europe against the African, Amerindian, 
Malagasy and Indian populations constitutes a crime against humanity. The original French 
wording of the law uses “la traite négrière”, which in the Dutch context is better to reverse 
towards a more general terminology of slavernij (slave trade), to avoid the racist and offensive 
connotations of analogous Dutch words such as “negroïde” and “neger”. Should this type of 
legislation be advisable, it is up to the Advisory Board to define the specifying elements of 
slave trade and broader colonial past in the Dutch context (e.g., exclusively in the Caribbean or 
also in the East Indies). The insufficiently clear scope of the legal provision risks delivering 
inadequate legal certainty, and clarity is one of the principal aspects in the rule of law 
assessment.      
 
 30
