bijlage 4b
 
  
It is preferable that memory laws avoid historic narratives that nourish simplistic interpretations 
of events or persons, in particular those that depict historical processes in terms of collective 
guilt (‘perpetrator nations’) or untainted innocence (‘victim nations’). Such narratives 
154
inevitably lead to polarization, stereotyping, and inter-state, inter-cultural tensions. 
 
Based on the aforementioned principle of legal certainty, it appears that a ‘declaratory law’ (i.e. 
without a punitive effect) guaranteeing the establishment of a national monument, knowledge 
center, and / or museum of slavery is less problematic than adoption of the law prescribing 
slavery as a crime against humanity in the Netherlands. In fact, it is not uncommon for state or 
local administrations to establish such institutions. However, the problem to be taken into 
account by the Advisory Board should consider what exactly should be established by the 
envisaged law, to be truly meaningful and delivering justice to the descendants of the victims 
155
of slavery. For example, should such entity(ies) commemorate some specific or collective 
victims of slavery, in addition to clear provisions pertaining to their governance and budgetary 
sources? If the choice falls on the creation of a knowledge center, it is equally pertinent to 
prescribe its competences and withdraw from empowering it with any quasi-legislative or 
quasi-judicial powers, in line with those enjoyed by the Polish INP, demonstrated in section 
4.2.   
 
5.1.2 Risk pertaining to criminal sanctions  
 
The EU Framework Decision 2008 imposes an obligation on EU Member States to bring 
criminal charges, inter alia, for publicly ‘condoning, denying or grossly trivialising crimes of 
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes as defined in Articles 6, 7 and 8 of the Statute 
of the International Criminal Court, directed against a group of persons or a member of such a 
group defined by reference to race, colour, religion, descent or national or ethnic origin when 
the conduct is carried out in a manner likely to incite to violence or hatred against such a group 
or a member of such a group’. Yet based on the law of the Council of Europe, equally binding 
for the Netherlands as EU law, it is important to consider the practice of the ECtHR in this field. 
The present study of the jurisprudence of the Court concludes that adopting a memory law with 
a criminal effect regarding colonial past will be considered disproportionate with regard to 
protection of freedom of (in particular, academic) speech in terms of Article 10 ECHR. The 
principle of proportionality implies all legal actions and state decisions must be established by 
the law, necessary, relevant (suitable) and least restricting the right of the individual. However, 
a declaratory non-punitive memory law with a clearly self-inculpatory nature is unlikely to be 
found disproportionate, should an individual complaint emerge at the ECtHR against the 
Netherlands. 
 
  
 
154
 For a rich account of numerous examples on this, see Nikolay Koposov, Memory Laws, Memory Wars: The 
Politics of the Past in Europe and Russia, Cambridge University Press, 2017; Uladzislau Belavusau & Aleksandra 
Glis z c z yńs ka-Grabias, Law and Memory: Towards Legal Governance of History, Cambridge University Press, 
2017. 1-26.   George Soroka and Félix Krawatzek, Nationalism, Democracy, and Memory Laws, Journal of 
Democracy, 30, 2, 2019. 157–71. 
155
 Regarding the ethics of justice in the context of memory governance, see Christopher Piranio & Edward 
Kartenian, Memory, Justice and the Court: on the Dimensions of Memory-Justice under the Rome Statute, 
Cambridge Review of International Affairs, 24, 3, 2011. 425-447; Antoon de Baets, Responsible History, 
Berghahn, 2008. 
 31
