5.1.3 Protection of freedom of speech, academic research and artistic freedoms 
 
Should the envisaged law be adopted as a non-punitive law with a declaratory core on colonial 
past, it still bears risks of exposing freedom of expression to a considerable censorship and 
156
chilling effect, as was unveiled by the Taubira law in France. Artistic narratives and 
imageries of the past, along with academic accounts of colonialism should enjoy particular 
liberty, as long as they do not contain explicit incitement of hatred towards specific ethnic or 
racial groups. Even in non-punitive form, the adoption of a memory law comparable to the 
Taubira law in France may instigate the rise of the ‘cancel culture’ (cancelcultuur) in Dutch 
universities, wherein any unconstrained discussion of the colonial past becomes limited and 
subjected to self-censorship by scholars who get inevitably ostracized for the non-mainstream 
assessments of the colonial past.  
 
5.2 Recommendations to be considered when assessing how such a law should look like 
  
5.2.1 Soft law versus punitive law  
 
The adoption of a declaratory non-punitive memory law in this field bears a particular value for 
constructing the egalitarian space, where the dignity of the slave victims and their descendants 
is fully acknowledged. In this respect, the positive side of this legislation pertains to non-
discrimination aspects in human rights and equality before the law in terms of the rule of law. 
Although not without caveats, as described in the previous subsection, the soft (declaratory) 
memory law appears to be less detrimental in terms of excessive constraints on the freedom of 
speech and more consistent with such elements of the rule of law, as equality before the law 
and legal certainty. The memory law should not be formulated as containing any criminal 
punishment of the defamation of the state or any abstract defamation of the memory of the 
victims of the colonial past. No individual or organisation should be subject to any criminal, 
civil, or administrative penalty or reprisal for accusing any past or present governing entity of 
having committed acts in violation of international human rights law, even if doubt exists as to 
whether such acts or policies would have constituted violations under international law at the 
time they were committed. Even a soft (non-punitive) law should be sufficiently concrete in 
terms of a definitional scope of slavery to satisfy the criteria of legal certainty. A symbolic core 
of such a law can indeed include a prescription to establish a national monument, knowledge 
center, and / or museum of slavery (see reservations addressed in the previous sub-section).      
 
5.2.2 Drafting of the preamble in accordance with applicable international and European law  
 
Along with the Rome Statute, the preamble to a potential Dutch memory law – depending on 
the final scope of this law –  may include references to the UN Commission on Human Rights 
Resolution 2005/66 of 20 April 2005, UN Human Rights Council Decision 2/105 of 27 
November 2006, and Human Rights Council Resolutions 9/11 of 18 September 2008, 12/12 of 
1 October 2009, and Resolution 21/7 of 10 October 2012 on ‘the importance of preserving 
historic memory’. The law may also reference the EU Framework Decision 2008/913/JHA. 
However, it is important to assure that it is not presented as a law implementing this EU 
secondary legislation in the Netherlands.  
 
  
 
156
 For the explanation of chilling effect, see Section 3.3. (supra note 103).  
 32
