bijlage 4b
 
  
5.2.3 Disclaimers for academic and artistic freedoms 
 
The law should contain a disclaimer for the protection of academic and artistic freedoms, 
precluding the imposition of constrained positions about slavery on the artistic works (including 
works of literature) and guarantee safeguards for the free discussion of the colonial past within 
the scholarly environment. Educators and students within tertiary and adult educational 
environments must enjoy the freedom to discuss violations of internationally recognised human 
rights that may have been committed by any governing entity or official. While primary, 
secondary, and other pre-adult education may be bound, in whole or in part, to follow 
compulsory curricula, educators and students must retain freedoms outside formal educational 
contexts to challenge accounts of history prescribed by such curriculum. Curricular choices 
about historical education, however, must be made, which at times may not satisfy all parents 
or citizens. Nevertheless, beyond the competence of such establishments, general freedoms of 
speech and expression must fully protect individuals and organisations wishing to voice open 
and public dissent from the adopted curricular choices.   
 
5.2.4 Form of the law: Wet or Rijkswet  
 
The Motie Nicolaï per se does not suggest a specific explanatory value in adopting this memory 
law either as a standard law of the Netherlands or an act of the Kingdom. Nonetheless, the 
present study finds that there is a possibility of adopting such memory law as a rijkswet. 
However, this will require a special form of the rijkswet because the substance of a law 
suggested in Motie Nicolaï transcends legislative areas of the Kingdom (in accordance with its 
Statute, enumerating the areas that give rise to the obligatoire rijkswetten). Therefore, the 
adoption of this consensusrijkswet will imply the necessity to negotiate its content by virtue of 
consensus amongst the four autonomous countries (landen) within the Kingdom, namely the 
Netherlands, Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten. The positive aspect of such a negotiation 
pertains to a multi-angle recognition of a victim perspective emerging via this legislative 
dialogue, since three autonomous countries are located in the Caribbean and their populations 
bear even a greater nexus to Dutch colonial past. The establishment of a joint institution in one 
of the autonomous countries involved in the study on colonial trade and / or a museum of 
slavery may be of an extra value, in this respect. However, involving four actors into the 
negotiation of a legal act may further complicate and slow down the agreement on its material 
and geographic scope, as was explained in section 2.2.     
 33
