other on a daily basis, thus creating an interesting social dynamic, but the distinction 
between free and enslaved was absolutely maintained and enforced throughout slavery 
(Espersen 2017). 
Following Emancipation, and despite the close proximity of the population in such a small 
island space, there was separation and segregation of white and black Sabans, especially in 
settlement exclusivity (Espersen 2019). The villages of Middle Island and Cow Pen are 
believed to have been predominantly black communities post-slavery, but abandoned, like 
Mary’s Point, by the mid-1900s because of their isolation and inadequate resources, but also 
increasing access to available settlements (Espersen 2017). Villages on Saba were until 
recently quite independent of each other, primarily because of the island’s steep topography 
and the difficulty of transportation between them, thus creating distinct communities that 
can be even identified in their individual accents. This geographic separation of villages also 
th
created segregated enclaves within them that was evident (into the late 20 century and 
still identifiable today) in Hell’s Gate, St. John’s, The Bottom and Windwardside. 
As a result of this segregation and the disadvantages accrued due to slavery and racial 
discriminations, most black Sabans found themselves in economic and social disparity 
relative to many white Sabans, notwithstanding the overall poverty of the island and 
specifically among some white Sabans (Espersen 2017, 2018, 2019). The large exodus of many 
white Sabans to other islands in the Dutch Caribbean, especially from The Bottom, resulted 
in black Sabans purchasing houses and lots that led to the area having a substantial black 
presence since the 1930s, and still evident today (Espersen 2017). Yet, despite a significant 
segment of the black Saban population accumulating resources and wealth, and vibrantly 
participating in the political life of the island, discriminations continued into the latter part 
th
of the 20 century. 
The numbers of black to white Sabans have fluctuated over the years, with the black Saban 
population equalizing with the white since the late 1900s. This makes Saba quite distinctive 
among the Dutch Caribbean and across the region where the descendants of enslaved 
Africans make up the majority population. This particular demographic has created a 
unique social dynamic on Saba that affected its social and economic interactions and power 
relations. 
PAGE 3
