bijlage 5a
Discussions 
Due to the limited time available to organize and carry out the discussions necessary to 
produce substantial recommendations, it was felt that a simple approach of proposing four 
straightforward questions to each of the three groups would elicit a fair amount of dialog 
among the participants. The four questions were: 
1) What do you know about slavery on Saba? 
2) What should we know about slavery on Saba? 
3) What is the legacy/impact of slavery on Saba? 
4) What recommendations would you propose to remedy some or all of the ill effects 
that were identified in the discussions of the three questions above? 
These questions proved a very efficient and approachable way to address the overall 
question of the impact of slavery on Saba, and generated the necessary dialog required to 
produce identifiable and substantial recommendations. 
In regard to the questions of what was known about slavery on Saba and what should be 
known, the overwhelming responses of participants were startling in that most knew little 
or nothing at all. There was a general sense that when it came to slavery on Saba there was 
an attempt to minimize, keep it “hush hush,” and even misinformation and denial. The view 
from some black Sabans was that the experience and knowledge were not passed on to 
them, as well as they seemed to have been a desire by the former enslaved to forget and 
move on for the sake of accommodation and building a new society. And what some of the 
participants knew about slavery was not particular to Saba, but the other islands of the 
Dutch Caribbean, and even the surrounding English-speaking islands. Thus the current 
void. 
For the few who could point to some fact of slavery on Saba was the identification of a 
document listing the names of the enslaved, their former owners, and the compensation 
received for them at Emancipation in 1863 (see Espersen 2017). A few others were aware of 
the archaeological excavations of plantation ruins at Spring Bay and Cove Bay, but unaware 
that these sites also yielded remains of enslaved materiality (see Espersen 2015, 2017; Lafoon 
et al. 2018). All agreed that the absence of information on slavery on Saba was rather 
PAGE 4
