unfortunate and must be remedied immediately as Sabans should be aware of their history 
in general, and knowledgeable of how that history impacted segments of the society, and 
the overall society. Most expressed a desire to know much more of what took place during 
the colonial era on Saba and specifically on slavery, and the experiences of the enslaved. 
There was a feeling that the history of Saba was told from only one side and much, especially 
slavery, remains hidden or unexplored (see Espersen 2017 for a comprehensive history of 
colonial Saba). 
When asked about the impact and legacy of slavery on Saba there was much discussion 
despite the overall lack of knowledge on the history of slavery on Saba. It was readily 
acknowledged by many of the participants that there were elements of racism, if not 
systemic racism on the island. Several participants talked of experiencing discrimination 
and racism, or having heard from family members who experienced it within their lifetimes. 
A few even referenced being denied entry into social gatherings in certain areas of the island 
as late as the early 1980s, or witnessing discrimination against mixed-race couples. Others 
believed that there was inequality in access, though admitted that there may exist a class 
bias and/or nepotism that may overshadow or mask perceived racial biases. Yet, some black 
Sabans felt that underlying racism is still present in certain interactions, even with the 
government, which believes that is not the case as its policies and practices are quite 
transparent. Several whites believed that racism was not an issue at all, but readily 
acknowledged that they could identify a few persons they would characterize as racist 
towards black Sabans. It is quite interesting to note that despite black Sabans holding 
political office on Saba for decades, it was perceived that some of these leaders made 
decisions primarily to maintain the status quo. All Sabans agreed that racial harmony has 
come a long way from three decades ago when many perceived that racial segregation and 
discrimination were part of the social and economic interactions on Saba. 
Many of the participants expressed the view that these discussions were necessary and glad 
they were happening, despite its difficult and controversial nature. It was expressed that the 
more everyone are aware of the others’ views/perceptions on racial interactions on the 
island then it is possible to better address and deal with them in the open and not continue 
to pretend that they are no issues that create tensions or disharmony. 
 
PAGE 5
