bijlage 5a
Recommendations 
In conversations with the three groups similar recommendations were put forward to 
remedy what they perceived as the issues stemming from the impact of slavery on Saba. 
These will be grouped as they will apply to several categories. 
1) Education 
It was quite evident that the majority of people consulted had very little or no knowledge 
of the history of slavery on Saba. Some questioned what form slavery on Saba took as they 
had learnt nothing of it, and possibly heard others say that it may not have occurred or was 
of a milder form. It should be noted that little information on Saba’s history is currently part 
of the curricula in the schools on Saba, thus Sabans do not have a strong sense of their own 
history other than anecdotal information on a few topics that may have been promoted for 
tourism or part of popular stories told to illustrate characteristics of Saban identity. 
The most immediate remedy to the absence of knowledge on the history of slavery on Saba 
would be to produce a detailed, professionally researched, factual and accessible (colonial) 
history of Saba. This should be written for both the general public and schools on Saba and 
1
made readily available to all. It is equally important that the history of slavery on Saba, 
along with a general history of Saba, be incorporated into both the primary and secondary 
schools’ curricula so that Sabans can gain a greater sense of their history from an early age. 
The history of slavery on Saba should be part of a public history program that displays and 
promotes the history of Saba for Sabans and visitors by interpretating the few historical sites 
across the island, integrating them into the popular hiking trails that many already explore. 
2
Specific sites to slavery can be highlighted to illustrate the extent of slavery on Saba. 
It was recommended that the history of slavery and its impact on Saba should become part 
of the Dutch national canon and educational curriculum as a way to integrate the Dutch 
 
1
 Such a book exists for the Indigenous history of Saba by Corinne L Hofman and Menno LP Hoogland, Saba’s 
First Inhabitants: A Story of 3300 Years of Amerindian Occupation Prior to European Contact (1800 BC – AD 1492). 
Sidestone Press, 2016. For the colonial period a good place to start would be Ryan Espersen’s “‘Better Than We’: 
Landscapes and Materialities of Race, Class, and Gender in Pre-Emancipation Colonial Saba, Dutch Caribbean.” 
Leiden University, PhD Dissertation, 2017. 
2
 A good example would be the abandoned (black) village of Middle Island that could be interpreted as was 
recently done for the abandoned village of Mary’s Point (see Espersen 2009, 2013), or the site at Spring Bay 
Flat. 
PAGE 6
