Caribbean into the Kingdom of the Netherlands, allowing all citizens to know and recognize 
the history of all the peoples of the Kingdom more fully. Saba’s history should not be lumped 
with the larger Dutch Caribbean, thus eliminating its uniqueness and specific identity. 
2) Research on the Impact of Slavery 
Some participants expressed the feeling that with the recognition that slavery has and 
continue to have an unequal impact on the descendants of the enslaved that resources 
should be provided to carry out research on several important issues that affect health and 
wellbeing, specifically mental health. Other possible areas of research can include the 
perception of income and material disparities between the segments of Saba’s population, 
and the access to equal opportunities, providing concrete data to determine future actions.  
3) Contrition for Slavery 
It was recommended by several of the attendees that the Dutch Government should 
apologize for the role of the Dutch in the Atlantic Slave Trade and slavery in the Dutch 
Caribbean, and recognize these as crimes against humanity. And to further recognize that 
the enslavement of captive Africans and their descendants inordinately impacted and 
continue to impact the lives of some inhabitants of Saba in a negative way.  
4) Emancipation Day Holiday 
The establishment of a public (government recognized) holiday for the commemoration of 
st
Emancipation Day (every 1 July) will signal a recognition of the importance of the end of 
slavery as is celebrated on several islands in the Dutch Caribbean. Emancipation Day on 1 
July 1863 was the beginning for Saba’s black families as it is the furthest back that they would 
be able to trace their ancestry, if at all. The celebration of Emancipation Day will also 
recognize the importance of slavery and freedom as part of Saba’s history, thus assuring 
black Sabans that their history and the suffering of their ancestors matter. 
5) Access to Genealogical Information 
Most or all of the descendants of the enslaved on Saba cannot trace their ancestry beyond 
Emancipation in 1863 when the names of the enslaved were listed showing their ownership 
and the compensation to their then owners. Some believe that creating access to any 
genealogical information that might be stored in Dutch and other archives should be made 
PAGE 7
