bijlage 5b
 
Contribution 
From the desk of MP Solange Ludmila Duncan, MSc. 
Parliament of St. Maarten 
 
 
T he	 A d vi esco l l ege	 d i al o o ggro ep 	 sl averni j verl ed en	 m u st 	 b e	 rei nst at ed . 	
	
Em a nci p a t i o n	 Da y	
Sint	 Maarten	 over	 the	 last	 decade	 has	 celebrated	 Emancipation	 Day	 on	 1	 July	 to	 commemorate	
the	 day	 when	 the	 Netherlands	 abolished	 slavery	 in	 Curacao	 and	 dependencies.	 Suriname	
celebrates	Keti	Koti.	
	
Unique	 to	 St.	 Maarten	 is	 the	 commemoration	 of	 the	 Diamond	 Hill	 Run.	 Slavery	 was	 abolished	 on	
the	French	side	of	the	island	15	years	before	the	Dutch	emancipated	their	slaves.	
	
The	plan	for	the	upcoming	Emancipation	Day	is	to	host	a	debate	on	the	impact	of	slavery	amongst	
youth,	 in	 addition	 to	 a	 reenactment	 of	 slave	 auctions	 as	 a	 part	 of	 the	 official	 commemoration	
ceremony.	
	
History	in	Kingdom	Schools	
St.	 Maarten	 History	 is	 not	 a	 subject	 in	 schools;	 not	 at	 elementary,	 secondary	 or	 tertiary	 levels.	
Antillean	 and	 Dutch	 Caribbean	 History	 and	 civics	 should	 also	 be	 taught	 in	 each	 and	 every	 school	
within	the	Kingdom.	
	
Comprehensive	 research	 will	 begin	 on	 local	 history	 and	 the	 creation	 of	 a	 committee	 to	 design	 a	
new	curriculum	to	include	the	history	of	slavery. 	
	
Impact	of	Slavery	on	Modern	Day	Kingdom	Relations	
The	Parliament	of	St.	Maarten	established	a	Constitutional	Affairs	and	Decolonization	Committee	
in	 2020;	 a	 permanent	 body	 tasked	 with	 the	 research	 on,	 discussion	 of	 and	 support	 of	 matters	 of	
constitutional	 change,	 kingdom	 issues	 and	 decolonization .	 This	 committee	 was	 proposed 	 as	 a	
response	 to	 what	 many	 believed	 to	 be	 as	 neo -colonialist	 behavior	 from	 the	 Government	 of	 the	
Netherlands	as	it	pertained	to	conditions	handed	down	to	the	islands	for 	liquidity	support.	
	
Kingdom	 Relations	 may	 be	 at	 its	 all -time	 worst.	 The	 Dispute	 Regulation	 (Geschillenregeling) ,	
what	 many	 believe	 to	 have	 the	 power	 to	eliminate	 the	 greatest	 democratic	 deficit,	 is	 still	 in	 draft	
form	after	a	decade.
