CrossMark
-
Ci)
Behavior of bats at wind turbines
Schlrmacherc, Diehld, Husoe,
Cryanb, Gorresenb, Heinc,
Cris D. Michael R. Robert H. Manuela M.
Paul. M. P. Marcos
Frickerh,
Douglas H. Johnson, Kevin Heist”, and David C. Dalton’
David T. S. Hayman, Paul 0. Frank J. Bonaccorsd,
Unit. University of Hawaii. Hilo,
Fort Collins Science CenSor, united States Geological SurVeY,$USGS). Fort Collins, CO 805265Hawaii Cooperative Studies
r8at
Science CenSor, U5GS. Bozeman, MT 59715; ‘Forest and Rangeland
HI 96720, Conservatiort International, Austin, TX 78716, Northern Rocky Mountain
tDepartment of Biology,
Ecosystem Science Coritcr, Corvallis, of Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins. CO 80523; 00partment
USGS, OR 97330;
MA 01760, ‘Pacific Isiand Ecosystcms Research Center, USGS. Hawaii National Park,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, “The MathWorks, mc, Natick,
bConservation
of Minnesota, Saint
Nerthern Pralrie WildlJe Research Center, USGS, Somt Paul MN 5S108, Biology Graduate Program, Univcr5ity
Nl 96718,
Paul, MN 55108, and ‘Wildilfo Engineering, Tucson, AZ 85745
approved Septeniber 3, 2014 (received for review April II. 2014)
Edited by Jamet F1 Orown, Linlversity of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, and
rok the susceptibuity of buts to wind turbines, and that tree
Wind turbines are causing unprecedented numbers of bat fatalities. in
(8).
fatalities involve tree-roosting bats, but reasons for this higher bats mighi somehow be attractcd to wind turbines
Many
behaviors The causes of bal collisions with wind turbines are unknown,
susceptibility remain unknown. To better understand
phcnomenon remain unexplored
associated with risk, we monitored bats at three experimentally and many explanations for this
wind States, from July 29 to (8). Proposed causcs of susceptibility range from bats randomly
mardpulated turbines in Indiana, United
past in large num
October 1, 2012. using thermal cameras and other methods. We bcing struck by turbine blades whule migrahing
scarching for
bats on 993 and saw many behaviors, indudirig [iers to hals being attractcd to wind turbines while
observed occasions
shelter, and social opportunihies
dose approaches, flight loops and dives. hovering, and chases. Mast important resourccs, such as food,
bats altered course toward turbines during observation. Based on (8). Although causes of susccptibility remain unknown, altering
wind speed turbine operutiuns under certain conditions during periods of
these new observations, we tested the hypotheses that
and blade rotation speed influenced the way that bats interacted high risk can reduce bat dcaths. Fatalities during late summier
more frequently at to wind speeds are lower
with turbines. We found that bats were detected and autumn tend occur whcn average
lower wind speeds and typically approached turbines on the leeward than about 5—6 m’s (4, 9, II)), and studies in Canada (1 1), the
(downwind) side. The proportion of leeward approaches inaeased (4) demoristrated that bat
United States (12), and Gerniany
blades
with wind speed when blades were prevented from tuming, yet deaths can [ie subslanlially reduced by preventing turbine
decreased when blades could turn. Bats were observed more fre winds reuch such pccds. Such operational
From turning unlil
these ob financial cosls
quently al turbines on moonlit nights. Taken together, niodilicalions ah wind facilities bring logishical and
servations 5uggest that bat.s may orient toward turbines by sensing prove to be effective at reducing bal fatalihies in many
but may
air currents and using Vi5iOfl, air turbulence caused by fast reasons why bals are
and that arcas (II, 12). Discovering the underlying
moving blades creates conditions that are less attractive to hals susccptiblc to wind turbines could help improve the cfficiency of
passing in close proximity. Tree bats may respond to streams of air uncover new ways of further
existing strategies and potentially
downwind searching for roostS,
flowing from trees at night while reducing fatalities whilc maximizing power production.
conspecifics. and noctumal insect prey that could accumulate in such we observed the bchisiors
In late summer and autilmn of 2012,
flows. Fatalities of tree bats at turbines may be the consequence of
of bats al u wind facility in northwest Indiana using thcmsat video-
behaviors that evolved to provide selective advantages when cameras, suppiemented with ncar-infrared video,
surveillance
elicited by tali trees, but are now rnaladaptive when elicited by better understand
acoushic deteciors, and radar. Our aini was to
wind turbine5. wind turbine blade movement influencc hctiaviors of
how and
development perception video surveillance wldiife
energy sensory
1 1
Sig nificance
wind ersergy
dyirtg unprecedented numbers wind turbines. bot
Bats are in ah
are long-lived low reproductive potential
manimals wiih Fatalities dur
causes of their susceptibility are unknown. peak
Lt5and require high adult suiivorship to maintain populations
ing low-wind conditions in late summer and autumn and pri
fatalities of hals al
(1, 2). The recent phcnomcnun of widespread trees. Common
marity involve species that evolved to roost in
ulility scale wind turbines rcprcscnts a new hazard with the p0-
behaviors of “tree bats’ might put them at risk yet the diffi
tential to dctrimcntally affect entire populations (3, 4). Bal fa high-flying nocturnal anirnals bas limited our
culty of observing
several conhinenis We
talities have been fouiid al wind turbines on understanding of their behaviors around tall structures.
with hypothesized estimates of fatalities in some regions thermal surveillance cameras for, to our knowledge, the
(3—6), used
year experimentally ma
ranging into the lens to hundreds of thousands of bats per first time to observe behaviors of bats at
vind nipulated wind turbines over several months. We discovereci
(4, 6). Beforc rccent observations of dead bats bcncath
in the ways bats approach and
turbines, fatal collisions of bats wiih hall structures had been previously undescribed patterns
interact with turbines. 5uggesting behaviors that evolved ah tall
rarely recorded (7). Most fatalities reported from turbines in the
trDes might be the reason why many bets die at wind turbines.
species that evolved to
United States, Canada, and Europe are of
primarily much of the year (trcc hals”),
roost in trees during
Autho corts utinn P.M.C, P,M 0., C OH, M R5, II HO • Nl MR, Fi 8., OH 3, KR. and
sonic of which migrate long distances in spring and late summier
rjearth; P.M P.M M R5, HO. and MM H performed
0 D d&gned C. 6, CD R, R
more than
to autumn (8). In North America, tree bats composc
rerea,th: 0 T 5H, P.D F., and O.C 0. caniributed new reageniriarralytic taak: P.M C.
thrce-quarters of the rcportcd bal fatalitics found at wind-cnergy ariaIyed data: P.M C, P.M 6.
t’ M G,CD H • M.R S. R HO, MM H, O.L5 H, and P.D F
CDH.MR5.RHD.MMH..F.JD.DHJ,andKH wrateltrapaper.
sitcs (6, 9), although there is a paucity of information from the
declare conlttct af Iniertsi
Mexico. Similar patterns occur the authors no
southwcstern United States and
in Europe (4). Another prominent pattern in bal fatality data This arllde is a PNAS Olrect 5ubmlsnian
from northem temperate zones is that most [atalities are found Freei aaallable online shrough the PNAS open accest aptian
with a much smaller
during late summer and autumn, sometimes carretporrdence Ensuli: cryanpøusgr gvv
ru whoin thould ho addrenred
peak of fatality in spririg (4, 6). Concurrent involvemcnt of
tupportlng anline wv pn,lt 10
Thit artlcle containt Information as -r6tlenkup)tupplidor
plays a key 1073 aa 4 6-7211110 pplemental.
species with shared bchaviors suggests that behavior
PNAS Early Edition 1 af 6
www.pnas orglcgildoilto.lO73ipnas.14066721 11
1
9
