and
bats aruund turbines, and thus fatality risk. Turbine operation Mest hals eshibiting focal behavier made single approaches
was manipulated so that we could observe if bat behaviors and then nioved away (72%), but many (27%) approachcd turbines
cluring a dciccticrn Tahle sucli interactions
activity pattcrns differed around rotating versus stationaly muhiple times SI) and
blades, and how bats interact wirh turbines under various oper at times Iasted several minutes. Dat detections within a night al
and tested the a turbine were found to be signilîcantly clustcrcd in time for 23 of
ating enviromnenlal conditions. Spccifically, we
as nwasurcd by an index applicd
hothcscs that wind and blade rotation speed influenccd the the 163 camera-nights (14%), (14)
way that bats approached turbines. to hal counts in sequenlial 10-min periods. Bats were more fre
delecied during periods when the rnoon phase was more
qucntly
Resuits
visihic (Knlmogorov—Sminiov
than half full and above the horizon
bat activity of threc test, D = 0.0822, P < 0.0001) (Fig. S2). Because the thermal
We recorded in the rotor-swcpt zones turbines
cameras do not rely rcflcctcd light, we assume this rclation
en 163 camera-nights (one camera dcpoycd for one night at a on
rather
turbine) during July 29 to October total 1304 hof ship with moonlighl was atiributabic to biological causes
1,2012, for a of
than detection bias.
chermal image!)’. Video detcctions of bats were treatcd as the
onder turbines after
same event when within t min less Twelve fresh bat fatalities were found
decected er of other bat ob
nights when video imagery was rccordcd (S! Resubs). Possible
servations (Fig. 1). Bats were detectcd al turbines throughout the
strikes or bats being moved by air around turbjnc bladcs wcre
study period (1 S) and throughout the night without siny up
obscrt’ed on video during two of the nights after which fatalicies
paTent trend Loward later or earlier activity over the study period
were found, and during only 18 of the 993 bat video detcctions
([, SI).
video-observcd strikes
were (2%). Because of this low frequency of
Approximately 3—4 million animals detected by radar
and other rarely observed inleraetion5 and behaviors (<1%
flying thruugh the monitored portions of the wind facility al er
in T:ibL S 1), we were unahie to adcquatcly test the
below about prcvulcncc
200 m above ground level during this study (!
cffects of wind and turbine blade speed on these phenumcna.
/?:b). Of Éhi numher, about a quarteT werc vcrtebrates oc
Bascd on the species composition of fatalitics and acoustic calls
curring within the heights swcpl
range of by turbine blades
R’uiliv), of our
recurded on the turbines (S! it is likcly that most
(2O0 m) (S! !-î-.). Among a total of 1,261 video detectioris of
video dctections invoived cree baLs.
large proportion wcrc (79).
llying animals, a identified as bats
detected more frequently al lower relative t. highcr
Bats were
with fewer detections of bat-like targcts (15%), hirds (2), likeiy
vind speeds, and this pattern was evident rcgardtcss of whcthcr
unidentified the bal
insects (3%), and objects (1%); only
the blades were spinning (Kolmognrov—Smirnov test,
turbine
detectiuns (n 993) were includcd in this analysis. Adjusting for
er (F’ri
D 0.2365, P < 0.00111) not (D = 0,1937, P <0.0001)
the number of tliemial cameras uperating the average
per night,
S When the wind was blowing> 1 m/s (96% of iiie time), hals
number of animal dcteetlons en video per turbine-night was 7.8 ).
were observed significantly more oflen
exhibiting focal hehaviors
0; first quartile: 2; third quartilc 12; max: and the
(min: 31)
(80% of detections) 0fl the Iceward (downwind) compared witis
average numher of bal dcteetions per turbine-night was 6.2
the evindward side of the turbine test = 329.3, df = 1, P <
(min: 0; first quartile: 1; 12; max; 26).
third quartile:
wind
0.001)!), regardless of turbine nacelle orientation. When the
Must (88%) video detections of bais involved flight trajccto
was blowing m!s, observed activity between leeward and
ries indicating the individual was moving toward the turbine,
relativc to nacelle oricncacion) was ap
windward arcas (gauged
hercafler referred to as “focal” behavior. We observed multiple
proximately equal and the streng prevalcncc of leeward bal ac
focal behaviors ofbats at turbines, scvcrat of which have not heen
tivity was nut evident (Fig. 24). 1-lowever, the propensity for
.ili and SI---S’l) Behaviors
prcviously rep()rted (1 SI (13).
was by
Iceward activity -al higher wind speeds also influenccd liie
iricluded close approaches to the monopole and nacelle (enclo
rotation of turbine blades, Similar to the general trend observed
sure of
machinery en top of monopole to which rotor and blades
in video deteetions, logislic revealed a significant in
regrcssion
are attaclicd), close approaches to slowly moving blades, flight
teraction bctwccn wind speed and biade rotation that resulted in
loops and dives centered the distant hovering, and
on turbine,
patterns of iceward aclivity (P = 0.0196). For cxample,
opposite
chasing other bats toward or near the turbines. Focal behaviors
rolating, the observed
whcn turbine blades were prevented from
often involved bats closely (<2 m) turbine mono
approaching the
frequency of Iceward approuches to the nacelle increascd from
pole (13%), nucelle (30%), and occasionally blades (6’;)( 1 .1 S
).
>90% wind spceds increascd from 0 to >8 m/s,
65% to as
whereas the proportksn of ieeward activity declined from >85%
to <70% with a similar incrcasc in wind speed whcn the turbine
blades were spinning (Fig. 2fl).
Focul hat behaviors, including close approaches to the
and nacelle, wcrc observed across a rangc of
monopole, blades,
al
vind speeds (0—9.6 mis), bul were dctected more frequcntly
lew blude-rotation spccds and less frequently al intermediatc
‘gI
>10 rpm).
and high speeds (classed as 0 to <1 rpm, 1—10 rpm,
-r ‘-‘ ‘
For cxamplc, of the 55 detections that invoived apparent hives
turbine blades, 31% occurred the blades were
tigations of when
P\
sluwly
stationary, 69 occurrcd when bhsdes were spinning very
(<1 a speed Lypical of near-windlcss conditions or when the
fig. 1. Stili images of night-flying bate (greeri aL wind turbines that rpm,
arrows)
into wind),
were detected in thermal-lnfrared video footage Cameras ware positionad blade edges were pointed the and none were detccwd
12 m from the base of the turbine. looking the B0-m monopote toward
up when biades vere spinning al test = 27.5, df = 2, P <
mm
(‘
the nacelie (rectarigular machinery enclosure) and rotor, to which three
0.0001). about 41% of the 110 monopole approaches
Similarly,
40-m biades attach Rad ciniet represent the object Identified as a bal by the
whcn
occurred when the blades were stationary, 51% occurred
lor finding in Ii) video
automated software used their presen’e nightiy (—10
blades were spinning vet)’ slowly, and only 8% of detections werc
recordings A variety of detection conditiont are iliustrated, Including a bat
noted rotation speeds test = 3 1.6, df = 2, P <
al higher
(x
fast rotating rpm) turbine biades aL about midtower height
approaching (14
0.000 t). NaceUc approachcs dcmonstrated a siniilar pattern,
(4), a bat fiying low (<10 m) above the camera (8), a bat approaching the
with 42%, 40%, and 18% of the 258 dctections in the stationary,
leeward side of a turbine rnonopole in doudy conditioris (C), and a bat fiying
higher rotalion-spccd categories, respectivety
in very slow, and
al about nacelle height the leeward air-space on the far eiste of a turbine
with blades rotating al full speed (D). test = 28.6, df= 2, P < 00001). Thcsc findings are all consistent
(r
www pnai.org/cgi!dolIlQ 1D73/pnas 1406672111 Cryan ei al
2 of 6
L?
(
l
l
