can be predictably fourid within flows
whcn important resources
(15). It was once believed that hals made their way through
darkness with the help of highly sensitivc touch receptors in thcir
wings and ears (18), but this concept of landscape orientation
received little subsequent attention after the discovery of echo
location (19). 1-Ïighly cvolved hair-ceil receptors on the skin
surfaces of bat wings rccently have been studied in detail; hair
rcceptors in bat wings are now known to play an important role
airflow across the
in flight control by sensing minute changcs in
wing surfaces (20). Whcther wing receptors help buIs to sense
Fig. 2. Spineptot depicts the proportion of observed bat activity as
(Lef)
subtlc patterns of airflow al larger spatial scales is unclcar, but
a function of wind speed (mis) In leeward (L light gray) and windward (Vti.
evidence of
Brazilian free-tailed bats (Tadarida bmsiiensis) show
dark grey) areas naar the turbine nacelle Spineplot bar wtdths are pro
currents and exploiting migrating insects
orienting through wind
portional to number observatlons wind interval,
the of within cach speed
visual acoustic
conccntratcd in airflows in the absencc of other or
with wider bars representing more observatlons (n 208 in the 3—4 mis
cues at high altiludes to 3,000 m above ground level (21,
category) and narrower bars representing fewer obrervatlons (n 6 in the bp 22)1.
general observations of bal activity in the Lee
>8 mis category) Predicted proportion of leeward activity (maan and 95% In light of previous
confidence interval) derived from logistic regression (Righf) illustrates the lccward bat
of windbrcaks and our observatioris of consistcnt
significant interaction of wind speed and blade rotatlon (whcre curtailment
activity at turbines, we suspect that hals are well adapted for
prevented turbine blades on some nights)
from rotating
sensing and oricnting by airlluws al landscape scales and that
going with the flow, or against in the case of bats aL turbines, may
tinderappreciatcd sensory modality that evolved in these
he an
wich the hypotheses that wind speed and blade rotation speed
night-flying mammals.
influenced way haLs approached turbines.
the that
Our thermal video cameras detected bats al turbines more
Most video dctections of bats involved single individuals, al
illumination and
often dtiring pcriods of night with hright moon
1
though a small proporlion (3; n = 29) inciuded pairs of bats.
lcss often during periods withi luwer levels of moonlight, sug 5
0
Bais were sccn chasing or following cach other during 4% (ii =
bats perceiving and approaching
gesting that vision plays a role in
0
14) of the obscrvations involving pairs. On a few occasions, bats
wind turbines. Bats rely on vision for long-distance orientation
chasing each other near turbines appear to touch in flight. One
(23—25), are known or suspected to orient througli landscapcs
video eveni revealed two hoary hats (Lasiunrs CIÎ1CÎL’US; identilied
usirig light cues, such as stars and postsunset glow (26, 27), and
from concurrent acuustic recordings) hovering next to euch other
use visual cucs to help tlsem find roosis in trees (28). The effects
in the airspace turbine for over after ii prior
ucar the nucelle 10 s
and fatality at turbines are not well
of moonlighi en bal activity
scquence in which they inieracted in the lee of the turbine Lower
ursderstood, bui a study in Alherta, Canada, rcported higher fa
(Mi Str)).
tality rates of silver-haired bats (Las(onycwrsijociivagaiis) at wind
turbines en nights whcn the nsoon was fully illurninated (29).
Discussion
There is no evidence that tree bat activily in the absence of, or
Our video observations indicate that many hals passing close
distant from, turbines varies with Itinar cycles or illuminatiun (30).
(<50 m) to wind turbines with stationasy or slow-moving blades
Acoustic data gathered on the turbines we monitored, which in
during late summer and autumn are atlractcd to and actively
cluded many calls from haLs passing higlier in the airspacc than
approach them using minirnally turbulent air cttrrcnts, vision, and
our cameras could image, did not show a trend toward proper
to some degree ceholucation for orientatiori. In contrast, radar
tionally more activity onder moonlit conditions (Sf Rc-uitv),
observations indicaic that nocturnally migrating vericbrates,
lurther indicating general activity levels are not influcnced hy
presumed to be rnostly birds, likely far outriumbered bats in the
moonlight. The patlerns we observed en video could bc altrib
airspace, yet their near absence from video observations sUggests
the wind waxing
utable to the visual conspicuousness of turbines
as hals,
that hirds did not interact with turbines in the sarne way
and waning with the rnoori, affecting liie probability of passing
possibly avoiding thein. Furthermore, acoustic detectors pointing
bats sceing and moving closer to them to investigale.
upward from the tops of the turbine nacelles regularly detected
wind
Despite our observations that suggest hals orient toward
the calls bats cameras, indicating that
of not observed by video
turbines using flow and visual cues, the reasons wlty tlsey do 50
some bats passed high in the airspace above the turbines without
we could not determine why bats
remain unknown. Although
closely approaching. to bc decermined what proportion
It remains
behaved the way thcy did around turbines, we suspect that such
of passing bats approach turbines and whcthcr thcy might re
association witis trees. Al a fundaruental
behaviors evolved in
spond to the presence of turbines over greater distances than
turbines
level, tree bats may not be able to discrimiiiate wind
those we observed with video cameras.
from trees (3). lloth trees and turbines have tail and cylindrical
l3ats likely can sense and respond 10 air currents. Wc saw no
conspicuous “crowns” (nacelles),
“trunks” (monopoles), visually
preference in the dircciions from whicli thcy approached turbines
and radially cxtending “limbs” (blades). Bats are rurely reported
whcn the wind was not blowing or was blowing vcry genily, but
interacting or colliding with other tall structurcs (7), as rnight be
hals consistently approached from Iceward aL wind speeds >1 mis. we observed were general response to
expected if the behaviors a
The dnwnwind direction of activity only when air was moving
structural stimuli. 1-lowever, a recent study revealed higher ac
suggests that hals know which way the wind blows and approach tivity late sununer and autumn at tall corn
of tree bats during
tal! structures in a patterned way that is independent of cardinal
munication towers compared with surrounding habitats (31). Bats
dircction. As do many animals that mcve through air (15), hals not have the cognitive ability to dillerentiate wind turbines er
may
orient by sensing and responding to flows through which they Ily. distance or aL
other tree-like structures from real trees citlier al a
Bats sometimes comniutc and foragc on the leeward sides of closc range, particularly if vLsual cues, such as similar silhoucttes
windbreaks, such as tree rows and cliffs, with the postulaced ben the night sky, are accompanied, reinforccd, or ovcrwhelrned
against
efits of leeward activity ineluding lower risk of predation, favor by other perceptual cucs, such as similar duwnwind uirflow put
able conditions for energy-efficient flight, and grcater availability terns. For examplc, the prcdatosy heette (Rhizophagzts grandis) re
of inscct prcy, particularly during high winds (16, 17). Bcing able sponds to disturbance of airflow around a simulated tree more
to follow flows can provide substantial sciective advantages to than the tree’s visual silhouettc (32).Wc do not know if the pal
and terns of behavior we observed apply to cave-roosting species of
animals, particularly when other sensory cucs are limited
PNAS Early Editlon 3 of 6
Cryan et al.
