that die aL wind Llrbincs c.g., genera Myotis and TadLlHda Bals might also closely approach turbines while looking for
(6)1. bui even cave-roosting bats may occasionally visil trees for social opportunities. Similarities in the social behaviors of trec
the reasons discussed below. bats in Norili America and Europc led to speculation that bats
Key findings of our siudy were might usc the tallest trees in landscapes as flocking or gathering
that wind speed and blade
rotation speed influenced the way that hals approachcd turbines. pinces (35). Tree bets tend to begin mating during the linie when
Bats approached turbines lcss most mortality is documented at turbines (36), and bats seeking
frequently when tlicir blades were
hals
mates al trees may bc drawn toward turbines and other
spinning fa.st and the prevafence of keward approachcs to the (37) lali
structures (31). We observed pairs of bets in 3% of our abscrva
nacelle increased with wind speed al turbines with slow-moving
lions, and in about half of thosc cases lhcy appeared to be fol
or stationary blades. A plausible explanation for these patterns
we two hoaiy
S!!) lowing or chasing each other. In one casc observed
(sce for others) is that airflow profiles around tail
4
hals in the lee and recorded social calls (Moie s to), bot did not
trees and turbines with station-aiy blades may hc very similar to
sec evidence of larger sociul aggrcgations that were hypothesized
each other (eg., oscillating swirling palterns, called a Krmin
for this spccies (37). Many species of tree bats in Europe cxhibit
vortex street), whcreas the spinning blades
of turbines cause
mating flight displays cenicrcd on trces during late summer and
chuotic downwind turbulence (33) that is unlikely to resembie
autumn, behaviors
bul such flight have not been rcported for any
any natural airflow patterns that bats might associate with trees,
temperate North American hals (37). We speculate that some of
1f trec bais find and orient toward trees by sensing and moving
the sustaincd leeward focal behaviors that we observed at turbines
into upsiream
airflows, turbines may rcsemblc trccs only whcn
d
in our study, such as rcpcaled looping returns and divcs (Movie
the blades are moving slowly or are stationay. In other words,
night be associated wilh mating displays that could occur
uirfiow s-),
paths that bats potcntially follow may not be present
al trees. The “upstreum we observed
orientalion” frequently is
r
downwind of turbines with fast-spinning blades. Nighttimc flight
eomniori in other types of flying and swmmming organisms during
behaviors of hats
around tali trees during late summer and au
foraging aiid mate-searching movcments (15).
! wmn have not been reported, buL obscing such
finding and
flats may he drawn in by insecis whosc distribution is con
behaviors if thcy exist might help explairi why (ree hals are sus
ccntrated around wind turbines. Empirical data denionstracing
ceptible to wind turbines.
the consistenl presence and aggregatinn of insecis aL turbines
Compounding liie potential for bats to mistake wind turbines
during the night are lacking, bul insccts are known to foul tur
for (rees is the possibility that lhey cxpect important resources
bine hlades (38), be nttractcd to certain turbine pailit colors (39),
when they arrive al the “lrees.” Such possible expectations may
and migrate in large numbers during periods of bat fatality al
not apply to concurrcntly
migrating birds, which radar detccted
turbines (40). In addition, buis have heen obscrvcd foraging neer
in apparently high ahundance in the surrounding nirspacc yet
turbines (4, 34) or Found dead bencalh tiicm witli [til1 stomachs (41,
•
were infrequcntly
observed on video neer turbines, l3ats may
42), higlilighting the plausibilîty or the fceding Alchough
liotliesis.
exploil streams of air flowing downwind from Irces, turbines, and
regulurly observed we ob
we insects in the video imagery, did not
• perhaps other
tree-like structurcs e.g., comrnLlnication towers
serve the frequent presence of insecis witli bal delections or record
(31)] al night while searching for roosts, conspecifics, and pos.
any unambiguous feeding calls of bats al turbines (S! Rciulis), oor
sibly feeding on nocturnal insccls that could accumulate in such
did we regularly ohscrvc witat we would consider typical furaging
flows. Many of the hypothesizcd couses of tree bat susceptihility
behuviors of hals during our sludy. 1 lowever, this ohservcd kick of
to turbines involve attraction (8). Our observations are consis
insects and typical foraging paltems does not preclude liie possihility
tent willi the possibility that bats ure attraclcd al close distances
that hals expccted to ftnd insecLs al the turbines thcy approached.
(<50 m) to turbines with stationary or stowmoving blades, bul
V-
There are scvcral general patterns of insect behiavior and
the potential source
of attraeUon rernains unknown. We did not
give leeward behaviors
dislribution that us reason to suspect the
sec evidence of close-scale attraction based solely on physical
we observed ei turbines rnight be associated wilh bats cxpccling
phenomena, such as hcat, electromagnctic fields, or sounds
the SiructureS as they approachcd, irrcspeclivc of
insects al
generated by specific parts of the turbines, because focal behav
Oie actual presence of insects. InsecLs often accuniulatc on the
were dispersed
iors across many different parts of the turbine
leeward sides of artificial and nalural struclures, and behind
structurc, oflen involving motionless blades monopoles.
and inert
windbreaks insects tend
to increase in numhcr and density with
A prior study also reported haLs focusing attention on monopoles,
wind speed (43, 44). Many diurnul and crepuscular insects swarm
nacelles, and blades of wind
turbines, bot no part stood Out as
abovc promincnt high points landscapcs during calm conditions
in
caractilig disproportionately more bats than others (13). The
and such aggregations often blow Iceward in windy conditions (45,
varicty of turbine toward which attention
parts bais focus their
46). Certain nocturnal insects, such as gypsy (Lyniantn’a dispar) and
suggcsts a general closc-range altraction, bul the strong leeward
spruce-budworm (Chorisioneurn molhs, lay eggs in and dis
spp.)
cumponcnt varicd
to these focal behaviors may offer clues as to
perse from the tops of tail t rees during late sunimer and autunin
whal bets miglit be tiying to find.
(47, 48). flats sometimes (eed insecls dispersing from trees. For
on
Resource-based hypotheses attraction inchide
of haLs seeking
exumple, Lloyd cl al, (49) reported bais fecding on cmerging spruce
shelter, social opportunities, or food al turbines (3, 8, 9, 13), all of
bodworm moths, and Lewis (50) reported castern red bats fccding on
which may occur on
more often the leeward sides of talI, tree-like
moths in the airflowx lceward of human-made structures: “Whcn
structures. The simplest explanation for bats closely approaching
a moderate, stcady wind is blowing over a moth-irifestcd crib 1
Ecomi
turbines
may bc hat they are seeking placcs to roost in what thcy
have seen baLs strung out ina narrow belt toe distance of 200 yards or
perceive as trees while migruting. We regularly observcd hoary
wind.”
more, catehing moths that were carried by ihe Given the
hals and castem red hals (Lasiurus borculi.r) llying in onder the
hikelihood of inseels accumulating al night abovc and in the lee of tail
bottom of the Iceward nacelle making close approaches to
and cnvironmcnls, Iceward behaviors
trees in naturel the focus of bat at
the
recessed cxhaust port (Mo’.ie S4). Alchough we did not see
trce-likc struclures may not be coincidcntal.
dear cvidcnce of buIs consistently tzying land on turbines, we
to Resource-based attraction hypotheses involving shelter, social
frequently obscrved haLs approaching the monopolcs veiy closely,
opportunitics, and food all seem plausible in the light of our
as previousiy reported (4, 13, 34).
The high proportions of closc resuits, bot gathcring direct evidersce of such resource usc by bets
approaches focused on nacelles and monopoles (Tab[c S1) are may not be pussible al wind turbines or other anthropogenic
consistent with bats tiying to (md piaccs to land. After not finding
structures. The roosls, conspcciftcs, and insect prcy that bals night
suitablc places to alight upon (eg., close investigations reveal expect al turbines er other tree-like artificial structures would not
turbine surfaces loo smooth), buis may simply move 0fl. nccessarily have to occur lherc to draw thcm in and pul them al
4 al 6 www.pnas.org/cgl/dolIlViQ73Ipnas1067211 at.
Cryan et
