until —1 h after sunrise
recording began within 1 h of sunset and continued
risk. I3ats be acting upon the expectation of resources rather
may
addhiori to the thermal carneras, we simultaneously recrded supple
In
than the actual presence of resources. Fatalities of buis al turbines
imagery (St
mental naar infrared (NUl) video Methods),
may be thc consequcnce of behaviors that evolved to provide se
lective udvantages when elicitcd by tail trees, but aee now malad
af Video lrnagery.We manually reviewed video imagery at high speed
Resuiew
aptive when eLicited bywind turbines. Paradoxicafly, direct cvidcnce
with vlewing software (VirtualDub,
(scan speed —1 mlnih of recorded imaçjery)
wind turbines may nol be
of the causes of tree bal susccptibility to
www virsualdub erg; VLÇ wwv,vdeolan,org) and then a second time using
observable al wind turbines, but instead al the trees and their as
statistical software
custom-written code (Dataset 51) and rnatrix-based
1
where potcnthslly eausal behaviors evolved.
sociated resources (Matiab with Image Processing Toolbox, Mathworks) that automatically
the thermai video scenes
Our observations have practical implicutions. Although our detected events in which animals flew through
small
Automatic processing algorithms identified fracties with motiors of
scope of in[erencc is .limjted to ccrtain trec buis (L. boreahs,
PA
blades. Although video was
objects not assaclated with the rnoving turbine
L. cinereus, and L. iwcsisagans), areas of turbines from the rotor
recorded al 30 frames per iecond. only every 3Oth video frame was analyzed
swcpl one around the nacefle to neur ground (diffcrent
the
automated processing, resulting In detection
because of time corsstralnts on
behaviors may occur higher in the airspacc), and ure based on
of events rriostly lasting 1 s. However, because bat usually took several
observations from just three turbines midwestem North America,
in
of of alrspace around the turbine, we 58w
seconds to traverse the tens meters
efforts to monitor baL activity near turbines (c.g., acoustic detectors
evidence that this sampling rate corrsislently rnhssed bats when they wero
no
video cameras), or deter buis from turbines [c.g., dcviccs
and of bets observed iikcly 1 ly at speeds 7 mis (53). The size
present Species we
producing siartling sounds (51 )J may benefit by niming instrumerits of the fie!d of view was about 55 x 40 m given the —1 10-m resolution range
that height would require eI leest
from the back of the nacelic into the Iceward airspacc, tin area of the cameras We estimate that a bal al
5—6 s to traverse the imaged area and would be detected in as many video
where we consistently observed highcr baL activity regardless of
with misilng bali passing through the
frames. Therefore, any bus associated
changing wind directions. Strategies for mitsimizing fatalities of
camera
video scenes in <1 s would involve those passing relatively close to the
buis aL turbines currenhly focus on preventing blades from spin
of bets at nacelle height.
and not effect the detection
II
ning during low wind periods (4, 11, 12). Our observations that
scanning or software
All potential flying objects detected by high-speed
tree bats show u tendency to closely investigate inert turbines and
visually and charactorized by as Ieasttwo observer
algorithms ware revlewed
sometimes linger for minutes to perhaps hours (in the cases of
(1’ M.C and P,M.G). These detections included lnsects flylng close to the
5-
scenario in
clustcred observutions) high)ight the plausihility of a
(whlch ware lgriored and not tabufated), as well as bets and small
cameras
whicli buis are drawn toward turbines in low winds, but sometimes
birds flying around the turbines up to the airspace abovc the nacelle, larger 0
1.l
w
birds flying highar above the rotor-swept zone, and alrplanes and clouds
remain long cnough to hc put al risk when wind pieks up and
cameras
much higher Based oct the pied resolution of the thermal and
hiades reach higher speeds. Therefore, iiie frequeney nf in
the distance at which a bal could be resolved with more than 1 pixel, we
1
vind low-wind
lermiltent, blade-spinning gusts within such pen
of 110 m
estiruate our range of cletecting bets witt’ the cameras was upwardi
ods inighi he tin important predictor of [atalily risk; fatulities may
thermal cameras situatd 1? m trom the base of the turbine and the
With the
from
occur more oficn when turbine blades are transitioning
camera to nacelle was
nacelles sitting dop 80 m towers, the distarsce from
potentially atiructive (stationary or slow) to letlial (fust) speeds.
Bi Our video obsarvations from the Ihermal cameras and supplamentery
m
rniglit benefit
Efforts to minimize bui fatalities al wind facilities
revealad that smaller bats (for
imagery from the NIR cameras (5f Mestods)
by averaging wind-speed curtuilment ihresho)ds over longer pen
crxample, cattern red bets, iderrtified acoustlcally) (5? Method) werd easily
intcrmitlently less
ods of time (e,g., >10 min) to prcvent gusts from detectable up to rsacetfe height bul tended to become much detctable
thay mosed higher than the riacelle, whereas larger bets (for example,
pushing bladcs to lcthal speed cluring low-wind periods. Finally, as
alrspaco 20—40 m
hoary bats, iderrtifiod acoustlcally) ware detectable in the
appeararice of turbines.
fatalities may be reducihie by aliering the
above the nacella Although spatiel positions of objects are sometimes dif
Fewer fatalities of castem red buis were found under turbines with
typically able to judga
ficult to determine in 2D video Imagery, we ware
rcd aviation lights al ii large wind facility in Texas (52),
Ilashing
locatloris of bats in the airspace using reflcctioos In the thermal imagery
hinting at the possibility that suppiemenial Iighting of turbines
thermal reilactions of bets could be seen oct the
(e.g - during close approaches
make some buIs Icss tikely to misiake thcm for irees.
might
turbine tower). shadows in the correspondlrrg NIR imagery (eg., bat passing
riacelfe), and visually observing the parallas of the
close under bottom of by
Methods
bat from th different view angles of the thermal and NIR cameras
Study Area and Esperimental Design. We cocrducted this study at a wind
detoction of ict the thermal imagery we recorded the
For each a bal
turbine facility (Fowler Ridgc Wind Farm, BP Alternative Energy. Oak)and, CA
of the
tollowing information: number of individuals present, orlentation
and Dominion Rcrsourccs mc., Richmorsd, VA) in Benton Courity. iN, which
nacelle. predominant area of bal activity relalive to
nosecone on the turbine
corssisted of 355 wind turbines with a totai nameplate capacity of 600
windward),
direction the turbine nose was pointing (leeward, rotor speed
megawatts (MW). The 20,234-ha site is dominated by agricuitural lands
course response to the presence of the
(rpm), whather the bat altered in
(mostly soybean and corn with buildings and forested areas corn
fields) (<2 rn) approachcs to
turbine (local behavlor), whether thc bat made date
posing <5% of the total area, Th topography is rnostty fiat wtth elevations
nacelle, or blades duririg the event, whethcr the bat
the turbine monopo)e,
V82,
ranging from about 210-225 in. The threc turbines monitored (Mode) moving turbine blada, es well as
appeared to be ttruck or displaced by a
Vostas Wind 5ystems) aach had a narneplate capacity of 1.65 MW. 82 m rotor
descriptivo cornments about the event, Turbine orientation was character
diameter, and B0-m-hlgh monopole. and
izd from video, but we also analyzed meteorological operatlonal data
To observe bat interactiont with turbines across a rarige of weather end the turbine nacelle. These data inciucied wind speed (mis) and
gathered at
(t) proportlon of iunar disk
operating conditions. turbines ware run urider three different scenarios: rotor speed. Moon iilurnlnatton was recorded as the
blades never rotating, (ii) blades not rotating (curtailed) ursti) wind speeds illuminated given that it was visible above the horiion. Moon iilumination
(iii) opetating conditions Applications Department of the
reached 6,5 mis, and blades rotating uridr normal data ware obtained from the Astroj,csmlcal
(begin rotating al about 2 mis wind speed). We randomly assigned operation US Navel Observatory (aa usno navy niilrindev php).
one of the three turbines
treatmeats cach night to that on any given night,
was randomly assigned to be oever rotating, curtailed, or futly operational.
Assalysis of Eet Behavior from Video Datectlons. Patterns of bal detection in
wind turbine operation were esamined witt’
relaticri to behavior, speed, and
Ko)mogorov—
Recarding Video Iniagery. We morritored the three turbines usinçj video Kolmogorov—Smirnov and tests and logistic regression.
2
with sensors that operate the ‘thermal spectrum of behavlor compared coridltioris (eg.. moon lllurrrination)
surveillance cameras in Smlrnov tests of bat
throughout
infrared light (-.9,000—14,000 om; Model Q1921.E with a 19-mm lens, Axis during bat detections relative to that recorded the study period
and which require no supplemental illumination. The ef for all nighttime 10-min iritervals. All statistical analyses ware performed iii
Communications)
Team, 8: A Language and Envi
fective sensor-array size of the cameras was 384 x 28.8 pisels, and we program II (v2.15.l; 8 Development Core
using netbook Statistical Computing. 2011), The temporal clustering of bat
recorded digital video at a cate of 30 frames per second ronment for
turbine was evaluated witt’ act index de
computers (Mode) 1104 A7K67UT. Hewiett-Packard) equipped with exterrral detectians within a night al each
from veloped for usa witt’ terriporal sequences where the data are grouped into
hard drises. We positioned these cameras 12 m the base of each tur
intervals Octections were grouped by 10-min intervals,
bine so that they imaged about two-thirds of the rotor.swept zone. Video equally-spaced (14).
Editior, of 6
Cryan al FNAS Early S
es
